MUHAMMAD 

his life based on the earliest sources 



Contents 


I 

The House of God 

page i 

II 

A Great Loss 

4 

III 

Quraysh of the Hollow 

6 

IV 

The Recovery of a Loss 

IO 

V 

The Vow to Sacrifice a Son 

12 

VI 

The Need for a Prophet 

15 

VII 

The Year of the Elephant 

i9 

VIII 

The Desert 

2 3 

IX 

Two Bereavements 

27 

X 

Bahlra the Monk 

29 

XI 

A Pact of Chivalry 

3i 

XII 

Questions of Marriage 

33 

XIII 

The Household 

37 

XIV 

The Rebuilding of the Ka’bah 

4i 

XV 

The First Revelations 

43 

XVI 

Worship 

46 

XVII 

“Warn Thy Family” 

50 

XVIII 

Quraysh Take Action 

5 2 

XIX 

Aws and Khazraj 

56 

XX 

Abu Jahl and Hamzah 

58 

XXI 

Quraysh Make Offers and Demands 

60 

XXII 

Leaders of Quraysh 

64 

XXIII 

Wonderment and Hope 

67 

XXIV 

Family Divisions 

70 

XXV 

The Hour 

75 

XXVI 

Three Questions 

77 

XXVII 

Abyssinia 

81 

XXVIII 

‘Umar 

85 

XXIX 

The Ban and its Annulment 

88 

XXX 

Paradise and Eternity 

93 

XXXI 

The Year of Sadness 

96 

XXXII 

“The Light of Thy Countenance” 

IOI 

XXXIII 

After the Year of Sadness 

io 5 

XXXIV 

Yathrib Responsive 

108 

XXXV 

Many Emigrations 

113 

XXXVI 

A Conspiracy 

11 6 

XXXVII 

The Hijrah 

118 

XXXVIII 

The Entry into Medina 

123 

XXXIX 

Harmony and Discord 

I2 5 

XL 

The New Household 

13 2 

XLI 

The Threshold of War 

135 

XLII 

The March to Badr 

138 

XLIII 

The Battle of Badr 

146 

XLIV 

The Return of the Vanquished 

153 



viii Contents 


XLV 

The Captives 

page 155 

XLVI 

Bani Qaynuqa 1 

160 

XLVII 

Deaths and Marriages 

163 

XLVIII 

The People of the Bench 

167 

XLIX 

Desultory Warfare 

170 

L 

Preparations for Battle 

172 

LI 

The March to Uhud 

i ?7 

LII 

The Battle of Uhud 

180 

LIII 

Revenge 

189 

LIV 

The Burial of the Martyrs 

191 

LV 

After Uhud 

i 95 

LVI 

Victims of Revenge 

199 

LVII 

Bani Nadir 

203 

L VIII 

Peace and War 

206 

LIX 

The Trench 

215 

LX 

The Siege 

220 

LXI 

Bani Qurayzah 

229 

LXII 

After the Siege 

234 

LXIII 

The Hypocrites 

237 

LXIV 

The Necklace 

240 

LXV 

The Lie 

243 

LXVI 

The Dilemma of Quraysh 

2-47 

LXVII 

“A Clear Victory” 

252 

LXVIII 

After Hudaybiyah 

257 

LXIX 

Khaybar 

263 

LXX 

“Whom Lovest Thou Most?” 

270 

LXXI 

After Khaybar 

274 

LXXII 

The Lesser Pilgrimage and its Aftermath 

280 

LXXIII 

Deaths and the Promise of a Birth 

286 

LXXIV 

A Breach of the Armistice 

291 

LXXV 

The Conquest of Mecca 

297 

LXXVI 

The Battle of Hunayn and the Siege of Ta’if 

304 

LXXVII 

Reconciliations 

308 

LXXVIII 

After the Victory 

3 i 3 

LXXIX 

Tabuk 

3 I 7 

LXXX 

After Tabuk 

320 

LXXXI 

The Degrees 

326 

LXXXII 

The Future 

329 

LXXXIII 

The Farewell Pilgrimage 

332 

LXXXIV 

The Choice 

337 

LXXXV 

The Succession and the Burial 

342 


Hap of Arabia (by Steven W. Johnson) 

346 


Quraysh of the Hollow (genealogical tree) 

347 


Note on Pronunciation of Arabic Names 

348 


Key to References 

349 


Index 

350 



I 

The House of God 


T HE Book of Genesis tells us that Abraham was childless, without 
hope of children, and that one night God summoned him out of his 
tent and said to him: “Look now towards heaven, and count the 
stars if thou art able to number them.” And as Abraham gazed up at the 
stars he heard the voice say: “So shall thy seed be.” 1 

Abraham’s wife Sarah was then seventy-six years old, he being eighty- 
five; and she gave him her handmaid Hagar, an Egyptian, that he might 
take her as his second wife. But bitterness of feeling arose between the 
mistress and the handmaid, and Hagar fled from the anger of Sarah and 
cried out to God in her distress. And He sent to her an Angel with the 
message: “I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be 
numbered for multitude.” The Angel also said to her: “Behold, thou art 
with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because 
the Lord hath heard thy affliction.” 2 Then Hagar returned to Abraham and 
Sarah and told them what the Angel had said; and when the birth took 
place, Abraham named his son Ishmael, which means “God shall hear”. 

When the boy reached the age of thirteen, Abraham was in his hun¬ 
dredth year, and Sarah was ninety years old; and God spoke again to 
Abraham and promised him that Sarah also should bear him a son who 
must be called Isaac. Fearing that his elder son might thereby lose favour in 
the sight of God, Abraham prayed: “O that Ishmael might live before 
Thee! ” And God said to him: “As for Ishmael, I have heard thee. Behold, I 
have blessed him . . . and I will make him a great nation. But My covenant 
will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time 
in the next year? 

Sarah gave birth to Isaac and it was she herself who suckled him; and 
when he was weaned she told Abraham that Hagar and her son must no 
longer remain in their household. And Abraham was deeply grieved at this, 
on account of his love for Ishmael; but again God spoke to him, and told 
him to follow the counsel of Sarah, and not to grieve; and again He 
promised him that Ishmael should be blessed. 

Not one but two great nations were to look back to Abraham as their 
father - two great nations, that is, two guided powers, two instruments to 
work the Will of Heaven, for God does not promise as a blessing that 
which is profane, nor is there any greatness before God except greatness in 
the Spirit. Abraham was thus the fountain-head of two spiritual streams, 


15:5. 


2 16: IO-II. 


17: 20—1. 



2 Muhammad 


which must not flow together, but each in its own course; and he entrusted 
Hagar and lshmael to the blessing of God and the care of His Angels in the 
certainty that all would be well with them. 

Two spiritual streams, two religions, two worlds for God; two circles, 
therefore two centres. A place is never holy through the choice of man, but 
because it has been chosen in Heaven. There were two holy centres within 
the orbit of Abraham: one of these was at hand, the other perhaps he did 
not yet know; and it was to the other that Hagar and lshmael were guided, 
in a barren valley of Arabia, some forty camel days south of Canaan. The 
valley was named Becca, some say on account of its narrowness: hills 
surround it on all sides except for three passes, one to the north, one to the 
south, and one opening towards the Red Sea which is fifty miles to the 
west. The Books do not tell us how Hagar and her son reached Becca; 
perhaps some travellers took care of them, for the valley was on one of the 
great caravan routes, sometimes called “the incense route”, because 
perfumes and incense and such wares were brought that way from South 
Arabia to the Mediterranean; and no doubt Hagar was guided to leave the 
caravan, once the place was reached. It was not long before both mother 
and son were overcome by thirst, to the point that Hagar feared lshmael 
was dying. According to the traditions of their descendants, he cried out to 
God from where he lay in the sand, and his mother stood on a rock at the 
foot of a nearby eminence to see if any help was in sight. Seeing no one, she 
hastened to another point of vantage, but from there likewise not a soul 
was to be seen. Half distraught, she passed seven times in all between the 
two points, until at the end of her seventh course, as she sat for rest on the 
further rock, the Angel spoke to her. In the words of Genesis: 

And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to 
Hagar out of heaven and said to her: What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear not, 
for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. Arise and lift up the 
lad and hold him in thy hand, for I will make him a great nation. And 
God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water} 

The water was a spring which God caused to well up from the sand at the 
touch of IshmaePs heel; and thereafter the valley soon became a halt for 
caravans by reason of the excellence and abundance of the water; and the 
well was named Zamzam. 

As to Genesis, it is the book of Isaac and his descendants, not of 
Abraham’s other line. Of lshmael it tells us: And God was with the lad; 
and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness and became an archer. 2 After that 
it scarcely mentions his name, except to inform us that the two brothers 
Isaac and lshmael together buried their father in Hebron, and that some 
years later Esau married his cousin, the daughter of lshmael. But there is 
indirect praise of lshmael and his mother in the Psalm which opens How 
amiable are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts , and which tells of the 
miracle of Zamzam as having been caused by their passing through the 
valley: Blessed is the man whose strength is in Thee; in whose heart are the 
ways of them who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well. 3 

1 11:17-2,0. 2 ibid. 3 Psalm 84: 5-6. 



The House of God 3 

When Hagar and Ishmael reached their destination Abraham had still 
seventy-five years to live, and he visited his son in the holy place to which 
Hagar had been guided. The Koran tells us that God showed him the exact 
site, near to the well of Zamzam, upon which he and Ishmael must build a 
sanctuary; 1 and they were told how it must be built. Its name, Ka‘bah, 
cube, is in virtue of its shape which is approximately cubic; its four corners 
are towards the four points of the compass. But the most holy object in that 
holy place is a celestial stone which, it is said, was brought by an Angel to 
Abraham from the nearby hill Abu Qubays, where it had been preserved 
ever since it had reached the earth. “It descended from Paradise whiter 
than milk, but the sins of the sons of Adam made it black.” 2 This black 
stone they built into the eastern corner of the Ka‘bah; and when the 
sanctuary was completed, God spoke again to Abraham and bade him 
institute the rite of the Pilgrimage to Becca-or Mecca, as it later came to be 
called: Purify My House for those who go the rounds of it and who stand 
beside it and bow and make prostration. And proclaim unto men the 
pilgrimage, that they may come unto thee on foot and on every lean camel 
out of every deep ravine . 3 

Now Hagar had told Abraham of her search for help, and he made it 
part of the rite of the Pilgrimage that the pilgrims should pass seven times 
between Safa and Marwah, for so the two eminences between which she 
had passed had come to be named. 

And later Abraham prayed, perhaps in Canaan, looking round him at 
the rich pastures and fields of corn and wheat: Verily I have settled a line of 
mine offspring in a tilthless valley at Thy Holy House. . . Therefore incline 
unto them mens hearts, and sustain them with fruits that they may be 
thankful. 11 ' 

1 XII, 2 . 6 . 2 Saying of the Prophet, Tir. VII, 49. (See Key to References , p. 349.) 

3 K. XXII, *6-7. 4 K. XIV, 37. 



II 


A Great Loss 


ABRAHAM’S prayer was answered, and rich gifts were continually 
iA brought to Mecca by the pilgrims who came to visit the Holy House 
JL Jl in increasing numbers from all parts of Arabia and beyond. The 
Greater Pilgrimage was made once a year; but the Ka‘bah could also be 
honoured through a lesser pilgrimage at any time; and these rites con¬ 
tinued to be performed with fervour and devotion according to the rules 
which Abraham and Ishmael had established. The descendants of Isaac 
also venerated the Ka'bah, as a temple that had been raised by Abraham. 
For them it counted as one of the outlying tabernacles of the Lord. But as 
the centuries passed the purity of the worship of the One God came to be 
contaminated. The descendants of Ishmael became too numerous to live 
all in the valley of Mecca; and those who went to settle elsewhere took with 
them stones from the holy precinct and performed rites in honour of them. 
Later, through the influence of neighbouring pagan tribes, idols came to be 
added to the stones; and finally pilgrims began to bring idols to Mecca. 
These were set up in the vicinity of the Ka‘bah, and it was then that the 
Jews ceased to visit the temple of Abraham. 1 

The idolaters claimed that their idols were powers which acted as 
mediators between God and men. As a result, their approach to God 
became less and less direct, and the remoter He seemed, the dimmer 
became their sense of the reality of the World-to-come, until many of them 
ceased to believe in life after death. But in their midst, for those who could 
interpret it, there was a clear sign that they had fallen away from the truth: 
they no longer had access to the Well of Zamzam, and they had even 
forgotten where it lay. The Jurhumites who had come from the Yemen 
were directly responsible. They had established themselves in control of 
Mecca, and the descendants of Abraham had tolerated this because 
Ishmael’s second wife was a kinswoman of Jurhum; but the time came 
when the Jurhumites began to commit all sorts of injustices, for which they 
were finally driven out; and before they left they buried the Well of 
Zamzam. No doubt they did this by way of revenge, but it was also likely 
that they hoped to return and enrich themselves from it, for they filled it up 
with part of the treasure of the sanctuary, offerings of pilgrims which had 
accumulated in the Ka‘bah over the years; then they covered it with sand. 

Their place as lords of Mecca was taken by Khuza‘ah 2 , an Arab tribe 

1 I.I., 15. 

2 See index for note on pronunciation of Arabic names, p. 348. 



A Great Loss $ 


descended from Ishmael which had migrated to the Yemen and then 
returned northwards. But the Khuza‘ites now made no attempt to find the 
waters that had been miraculously given to their ancestor. Since his day 
other wells had been dug in Mecca, God’s gift was no longer a necessity, 
and the Holy Well became a half forgotten memory. 

Khuza‘ah thus shared the guilt of Jurhum. They were also to blame in 
other respects: a chieftain of theirs, on his way back from a journey to 
Syria, had asked the Moabites to give him one of their idols. They gave him 
Hubal, which he brought back to the Sanctuary, setting it up within the 
Ka‘bah itself; and it became the chief idol of Mecca. 



Ill 


Quraysh of the 
Hollow 

4 NOTHER of the most powerful Arab tribes of Abrahamic descent 
LX was Quraysh; and about four hundred years after Christ, a man of 
J- JL Quraysh named Qusayy married a daughter of Hulayl who was 
then chief of Khuza'ah. Hulayl preferred his son-in-law to his own sons, 
for Qusayy was outstanding amongst Arabs of his time, and on the death 
of Hulayl, after a fierce battle which ended in arbitration, it was 
agreed that Qusayy should rule over Mecca and be the guardian of the 
Ka‘bah. 

He thereupon brought those of Quraysh who were his nearest of kin and 
settled them in the valley, beside the Sanctuary - his brother Zuhrah; his 
uncle Taym; Makhzum, the son of another uncle; and one or two cousins 
who were less close. These and their posterity were known as Quraysh of 
the Hollow, whereas Qus.ayy’s more remote kinsmen settled in the ravines 
of the surrounding hills and in the countryside beyond and were known as 
Quraysh of the Outskirts. Qusayy ruled over them all as king, with 
undisputed power, and they paid him a tax every year on their flocks, so 
that he might feed those of the pilgrims who were too poor to provide for 
themselves. Until then the keepers of the Sanctuary had lived round it in 
tents. But Qusayy now told them to build themselves houses, having 
already built himself a spacious dwelling which was known as the House 
of Assembly. 

All was harmonious, but seeds of discord were about to be sown. It was 
a marked characteristic of Qusayy’s line that in each generation there 
would be one man who was altogether pre-eminent. Amongst Qus.ayy’s 
four sons, this man was ‘Abdu Manaf, who was already honoured in his 
father’s lifetime. But Qusayy preferred his first-born, ‘Abd ad-Dar, 
although he was the least capable of all; and shortly before his death he 
said to him: “My son, I will set thee level with the others in despite of men’s 
honouring them more than thee. None shall enter the Ka‘bah except thou 
open it for him, and no hand but thine shall knot for Quraysh their ensign 
of war, nor shall any pilgrim draw water for drink in Mecca except thou 
give him the right thereto, nor shall he eat food except it be of thy 
providing, nor shall Quraysh resolve upon any matter except it be in thy 



Quraysh of the Hollow 7 

house.” 1 Having thus invested him with all his rights and powers, he 
transferred to him the ownership of the House of Assembly. 

Out of filial piety ‘Abdu Manaf accepted without question his father’s 
wishes; but in the next generation half of Quraysh gathered round ‘Abdu 
Manaf s son Hashim, clearly the foremost man of his day, and demanded 
that the rights be transferred from the clan of ‘Abd ad-Dar to his clan. 
Those who supported Hashim and his brothers were the descendants of 
Zuhrah and Taym, and all Qusayy’s descendants except those of the eldest 
line. The descendants of Makhzum and of the other remoter cousins 
maintained that the rights should remain in the family of ‘Abd ad-Dar. 
Feeling rose so high that the women of the clan of ‘Abdu Manaf brought a 
bowl of rich perfume and placed it beside the Ka‘bah; and Hashim and his 
brothers and all their allies dipped their hands in it and swore a solemn 
oath that they would never abandon one another, rubbing their scented 
hands over the stones of the Ka‘bah in confirmation of their pact. Thus it 
was that this group of clans were known as the Scented Ones. The allies of 
‘Abd ad-Dar likewise swore an oath of union, and they were known as the 
Confederates. Violence was strictly forbidden not only in the Sanctuary 
itself but also within a wide circle round Mecca, several miles in diameter, 
and the two sides were about to leave this sacred precinct in order to fight a 
battle to the death when a compromise was suggested, and it was agreed 
that the sons of ‘Abdu Manaf should have the rights of levying the tax and 
providing the pilgrims with food and drink, whereas the sons of ‘Abd 
ad-Dar should retain the keys of the Ka‘bah and their other rights, and that 
their house should continue to be the House of Assembly. 

Hashim’s brothers agreed that he should have the responsibility of 
providing for the pilgrims. When the time of the Pilgrimage drew near he 
would rise in the Assembly and say: “O men of Quraysh, ye are God’s 
neighbours, the people of His House; and at this feast there come unto you 
God’s visitors, the pilgrims to His House. They are God’s guests, and no 
guests have such claim on your generosity as His guests. If my own wealth 
could compass it, I would not lay this burden upon you.” 2 

Hashim was held in much honour, both at home and abroad. It was he 
who established the two great caravan journeys from Mecca, the Caravan 
of Winter to the Yemen and the Caravan of Summer to north-west Arabia, 
and beyond it to Palestine and Syria, which was then under Byzantine rule 
as part of the Roman Empire. Both journeys lay along the ancient incense 
route; and one of the first main halts of the summer caravans was the oasis 
of Yathrib, eleven camel days north of Mecca. This oasis had at one time 
been chiefly inhabited by Jews, but an Arab tribe from South Arabia was 
now in control of it. The Jews none the less continued to live there in 
considerable prosperity, taking part in the general life of the community 
while maintaining their own religion. As to the Arabs of Yathrib, they had 
certain matriarchal traditions and were collectively known as the children 
of Qaylah after one of their ancestresses. But they had now branched into 


1 LI. 83. Throughout this book, everything between quotation marks has been translated 
from traditional sources. 

2 I.I. 87. 



8 Muhammad 


two tribes which were named Aws and Khazraj after Qaylah’s two sons. 

One of the most influential women of Khazraj was Salma the daughter 
of ‘Amr, of the clan of Najjar, and Hashim asked her to marry him. She 
consented on condition that the control of her affairs should remain 
entirely in her own hands; and when she bore him a son she kept the boy 
with her in Yathrib until he was fourteen years old or more. Hashim was 
not averse to this, for despite the oasis fever, which was more of a danger to 
newcomers than to the inhabitants, the climate was healthier than that of 
Mecca. Moreover he often went to Syria and would stay with Salma and 
his son on the way there and on his return. But Hashim’s life was not 
destined to be a long one, and during one of his journeys he fell ill at Gaza 
in Palestine and died there. 

He had two full brothers, ‘Abdu Shams and Muttalib, 1 and one half- 
brother, Nawfal. But ‘Abdu Shams was exceedingly busied with trade in 
the Yemen, and later also in Syria, whereas Nawfal was no less busied with 
trade in Iraq, and both would be absent from Mecca for long periods. For 
these and perhaps for other reasons also, Hashim’s younger brother 
Muttalib took over the rights of watering the pilgrims and of levying the 
tax to feed them; and he now felt it his duty to give thought to the question 
of his own successor. Hashim had had three sons by wives other than 
Salma. But if all that was said were true, none of these - and for that matter 
none of Muttalib’s own sons - could be compared with Salma’s son. 
Despite his youth, Shaybah — for so she had named him - already showed 
distinct promise of gifts for leadership, and excellent reports of him were 
continually brought to Mecca by travellers who passed through the oasis. 
Finally Muttalib went to see for himself, and what he saw prompted him to 
ask Salma to entrust his nephew to his care. Salma was unwilling to let her 
son go, and the boy refused to leave his mother without her consent. But 
Muttalib was not to be discouraged, and he pointed out to both mother 
and son that the possibilities which Yathrib had to offer were not to be 
compared with those of Mecca. As guardians of the Holy House, the great 
centre of pilgrimage for all Arabia, Quraysh ranked higher in dignity than 
any other Arab tribe; and there was a strong likelihood that Shaybah 
would one day hold the office which his father had held and so become one 
of the chiefs of Quraysh. But for this he must first be integrated into his 
people. No mere exile from outside could hope to attain to such honour. 
Salma was impressed by his arguments, and if her son went to Mecca it 
would be easy for her to visit him there and for him to visit her, so she 
agreed to let him go. Muttalib took his nephew with him on the back of his 
camel; and as they rode into Mecca he heard some of the bystanders say as 
they looked at the young stranger: “ ‘Abd al-Muttalib”, that is, “al-Mutt- 
alib’s slave”. “Out upon you,” he said, “he is no less than the son of my 
brother Hashim.” The laughter with which his words were greeted was but 
a prelude to the merriment that was caused throughout the city as the story 


1 The name is al-Muttalib, except in the vocative case where the “al-” must be omitted. 
But since this prefix (the definite article) is cumbersome in transcription, the vocative form 
has been extended here throughout to most cases of proper names which begin with the 
article. 



Quraysh of the Hollow 9 

of the blunder ran from mouth to mouth; and from that day the youth was 
affectionately known as ‘Abd al-Muttalib. 

Not long after his arrival he was involved in a dispute about his father’s 
estate with his uncle Nawfal: but with the help of his guardian uncle, and 
pressure brought to bear from Yathrib, ‘Abd al-Muttalib was able to 
secure his rights. Nor did he disappoint the hopes that had been encour¬ 
aged by his early promise; and when, after several years, Muttalib died, no 
one disputed his nephew’s qualifications to succeed to the heavy responsi¬ 
bility of feeding and watering the pilgrims. It was even said that he 
surpassed both his father and his uncle in his fulfilment of this task. 



IV 


The Recovery of 
a Loss 

4 DJOINING the north-west side of the Ka‘bah there is a small pre- 
ZA cinct surrounded by a low semicircular wall. The two ends of the 
JL JL wall stop short of the north and west corners of the House, leav¬ 
ing a passage for pilgrims. But many pilgrims make wide their circle at 
this point and include the precinct within their orbit, passing round the 
outside of the low wall. The space within it is named Hijr Isma‘Il, because 
the tombs of Ishmael and Hagar lie beneath the stones which pave it. 

‘Abd al-Muttalib so loved to be near the Ka‘bah that he would some¬ 
times order a couch to be spread for him in the Hijr; and one night when he 
was sleeping there a shadowy figure came to him in a vision and said: “Dig 
sweet clarity.” “What is sweet clarity?” he asked, but the speaker 
vanished. He none the less felt such happiness and peace of soul when he 
woke that he determined to spend the next night in the same place. The 
visitant returned and said: “Dig beneficence.” But again his question 
received no answer. The third night he was told: “Dig the treasured 
hoard”, and yet again the speaker vanished at his questioning. But the 
fourth night the command was: “Dig Zamzam”; and this time when he 
said “What is Zamzam?” the speaker said: 

“Dig her, thou shalt not regret, 

For she is thine inheritance 
From thy greatest ancestor. 

Dry she never will, nor fail 
To water all the pilgrim throng.” 

Then the speaker told him to look for a place where there was blood and 
dung, an ants’ nest, and pecking ravens. Finally he was told to pray “for 
clear full flowing water that will water God’s pilgrims throughout their 
pilgrimage”. 1 

When dawn was breaking ‘Abd al-Muttalib rose and left the Hijr at the 
north corner of the Holy House which is called the Iraqi Corner. Then he 
walked along the north-east wall, at the other end of which is the door of 
the Ka‘bah; and passing this he stopped, a few feet beyond it, at the east 


1.1.93. 



The Recovery of a Loss 11 

corner, where he reverently kissed the Black Stone. From there he began 
the rite of the rounds, going back past the door to the Iraqi Corner, across 
the Hijr to the west corner - the Syrian Corner - and thence to the 
Yemenite Corner which is towards the south. The children of Abraham, 
alike the lines of Ishmael and Isaac, go round their sanctuaries with a 
movement opposite to that of the sun. As he walked from the Yemenite 
Corner to the Black Stone, he could see the dark slope of Abu Qubays and 
beyond it the further eastern hills, sharply outlined against the yellow light. 
Seven times he went the round, and each time the light was appreciably 
brighter, for in Arabia the dawns and the dusks are brief. Having fulfilled 
the rite he went from the Black Stone to the door and, taking hold of the 
metal ring which hung from the lock, he prayed the prayer which he had 
been told to pray. 

There was a sound of wings and a bird alighted in the sand behind him. 
Then another bird alighted and having finished his supplication he turned 
and watched them strut with their raven’s gait towards two statuesque 
rocks which were about a hundred yards away, almost opposite the door. 
These had been adopted as idols, and it was between them that Quraysh 
sacrificed their victims. ‘Abd al-Muttalib knew well, as did the ravens, that 
there was always blood in the sand at that place. There was also dung; and, 
going up to it, he now saw that there was an ants’ nest. 

He went to his house and took two pickaxes, one of which was for his 
son Harith whom he brought with him to the place where he knew that he 
must dig. The thud of the tools in the sand and the unusual sight — for the 
courtyard could be seen from all sides - soon attracted a crowd; and 
despite the respect generally felt for ‘Abd al-Muttalib, it was not long 
before some of them protested that it was a sacrilege to dig at the place of 
sacrifice between the idols, and that he must stop. He said he would not, 
and told Harith to stand by him and see that no one interfered with his 
digging. It was a tense moment, and the outcome could have been 
unpleasant. But the two Hashimites were determined and united, whereas 
the onlookers had been taken by surprise. Nor did these idols, Isaf and 
Na’ilah, hold a high rank among the idols of Mecca, and some even said 
that they were a Jurhumite man and woman who had been turned to stone 
for profaning the Ka‘bah. So ‘Abd al-Muttalib continued to dig without 
any actual move being made to stop him; and some of the people were 
already leaving the sanctuary when suddenly he struck the well’s stone 
covering and uttered a cry of thanksgiving to God. The crowd reassembled 
and increased; and when he began to dig out the treasure which Jurhum 
had buried there, everyone claimed the right to a share in it. ‘Abd 
al-Muttalib agreed that lots should be cast for each object, as to whether it 
should be kept in the sanctuary or go to him personally or be divided 
amongst the tribe. This had become the recognised way of deciding an 
issue of doubt, and it was done by means of divining arrows inside the 
Ka‘bah, in front of the Moabite idol Hubal. In this instance some of the 
treasure went to the Ka‘bah and some to ‘Abd al-Muttalib, but none of it 
to Quraysh in general. It was also agreed that the clan of Hashim should 
have charge of Zamzam itself, since in any case it was their function to 
water the pilgrims. 



V 


The Vow to 
Sacrifice a Son 


£ ABD al-Muttalib was respected by Quraysh for his generosity, his 
ZA reliability and his wisdom. He was also a very handsome man, 
X JLwith a most commanding presence. His wealth was yet another 
reason why he should consider himself fortunate; and now all this was 
crowned by the honour of being the chosen instrument through which 
Zamzam had been restored. He was deeply grateful to God for these 
blessings; but his soul was still troubled by thoughts of the moment when 
he had been told to stop digging, and when everything had seemed to hang 
in the balance. All had gone well, praise be to God! But never before had he 
felt so keenly his poverty - for so it seemed to him - in having only one son. 
His cousin Umayyah, for example, the head of the clan of ‘Abdu Shams, 
was blessed with many sons; and if the digger had been Mughlrah, the 
chief of Makhzum, his sons could have made a large and powerful circle 
round him. But he himself, although he had more than one wife, had only 
one son to uphold him. He was already half resigned to this; but God who 
had given him Zamzam could also increase him in other respects; and 
encouraged by the favour he had just received he prayed God to give him 
more sons, adding to his prayer the vow that if He would bless him with ten 
sons and let them all grow to manhood, he would sacrifice one of them to 
Him at the Ka‘bah. 

His prayer was answered: the years passed and nine sons were born to 
him. When he made his vow, it had seemed to refer to a very far-off 
possibility. But the time came when all his sons were grown up except the 
youngest, ‘Abd Allah, and his vow began to dominate his thoughts. He was 
proud of all his sons, but he had never been equally fond of them all, and it 
had long been clear to him that ‘Abd Allah was the one he loved most. 
Perhaps God also preferred this same son, whom He had endowed with 
remarkable beauty, and perhaps He would choose him to be sacrificed. 
However that might be, ‘Abd al-Muttalib was a man of his word. The 
thought of breaking his oath did not enter his head. He was also a man of 
justice, with a deep sense of responsibility, which meant that he knew what 
responsibilities were to be avoided. He was not going to place upon himself 
the burden of deciding which son he would sacrifice. So when it was no 
longer possible to consider ‘Abd Allah as a mere stripling he gathered his 



The Vow to Sacrifice a Son 13 

ten sons together, told them of his pact with God, and called on them to 
help him keep his word. They had no choice but to agree; their father’s vow 
was their vow; and they asked him what they were to do. He told them to 
make each his mark on an arrow. Meanwhile he had sent word to the 
official arrow-diviner of Quraysh, asking him to be present at the Ka‘bah. 
He then took his sons to the Sanctuary and led them into the Holy House, 
where he told the diviner about his vow. Each son produced his arrow, and 
‘Abd al-Muttalib took his stand beside Hubal, drew out a large knife 
which he had brought with him, and prayed to God. The lots were cast, 
and it was ‘Abd Allah’s arrow that came out. His father took him by the 
hand, and with the knife in his other hand he led him to the door, intending 
to make straight for the place of sacrifice, as if afraid to give himself time to 
think. 

But he had not reckoned with the women of his household, and in 
particular with ‘Abd Allah’s mother, Fatimah. His other wives were from 
outlying tribes and had relatively little influence in Mecca. But Fatimah 
was a woman of Quraysh, of the powerful clan of Makhzum, while on her 
mother’s side she was descended from ‘Abd, one of the son’s of Qusayy. 
All her family were at hand, within easy reach, ready to help her if need be. 
Three of the ten sons were hers, Zubayr, Abu Talib and ‘Abd Allah. She 
was also the mother of ‘Abd al-Muttalib’s five daughters, who were 
devoted to their brothers. These women had not been idle, and no doubt 
the other wives had sought Fatimah’s help in view of the danger that hung 
over the heads of all the ten sons, one of whom was the owner of the arrow 
of sacrifice. 

By the time the lots had been cast, a large gathering had assembled in the 
courtyard of the Sanctuary. When ‘Abd al-Muttalib and ‘Abd Allah 
appeared on the threshold of the Ka‘bah, both as pale as death, a murmur 
arose from the Makhzumites as they realised that one of their sister’s sons 
was the intended victim. “Wherefore that knife?” called a voice, and 
others reiterated the question, though they all knew the answer. ‘Abd 
al-Muttalib began to tell them of his vow but he was cut short by 
Mughlrah, the chief of Makhzum: “Sacrifice him thou shalt not; but offer 
a sacrifice in his stead, and though his ransom be all the property of the 
sons of Makhzum we will redeem him.” ‘Abd Allah’s brothers had by this 
time come out from the Holy House. None of them had spoken, but now 
they turned to their father and begged him to let their brother live and to 
offer some other sacrifice by way of expiation. There was not one man 
present who did not take their part, and ‘Abd al-Muttalib longed to be 
persuaded, but he was filled with scruples. Finally, however, he agreed to 
consult a certain wise woman in Yathrib who could tell him whether an 
expiation was possible in this case, and if so what form it should take. 

Taking with him ‘Abd Allah and one or two other sons, ‘Abd al-Mut¬ 
talib rode to the country of his birth only to learn that the woman had gone 
to Khaybar, a wealthy Jewish settlement in a fertile valley almost a 
hundred miles north of Yathrib. So they continued their journey, and when 
they had found the woman and told her the facts she promised to consult 
her familiar spirit, and bade them return the following day. ‘Abd al-Mut- 
talib prayed to God, and the next morning the woman said: “Word hath 



14 Muhammad 

come to me. What is the blood-wite amongst you?” They answered that it 
was ten camels. “Return to your country,” she said, “and put your man 
and ten camels side by side and cast lots between them. If the arrow fall 
against your man, add more camels and cast lots again; and if need be add 
more camels until your Lord accepts them and the arrow falls against 
them. Then sacrifice the camels and let the man live.” 

They returned to Mecca forthwith, and solemnly led ‘Abd Allah and ten 
camels to the courtyard of the Ka‘bah. ‘Abd al-Muttalib went inside the 
Holy House, and standing beside Hubal he prayed to God to accept what 
they were doing. Then they cast lots, and the arrow fell against ‘Abd Allah. 
Another ten camels were added, but again the arrow said that the camels 
should live and that the man should die. They went on adding camels, ten 
at a time, and casting lots with the same result until the number of camels 
had reached a hundred. Only then did the arrow fall against them. But 
‘Abd al-Muttalib was exceedingly scrupulous: for him the evidence of one 
arrow was not enough to decide so great an issue. He insisted that they 
should cast lots a second and a third time, which they did, and each time 
the arrow fell against the camels. At last he was certain that God had 
accepted his expiation, and the camels were duly sacrificed. 



VI 


The Need for a 
Prophet 


£ ABD al-Muttalib did not pray to Hubal; he always prayed to God 
/\ — to Allah. But the Moabite idol had been for generations inside 
JLjLthe House of God and had become for Quraysh a kind of 
personification of the barakah , that is the blessing, the spiritual influence, 
which pervaded that greatest of all sanctuaries. There were other lesser 
sanctuaries throughout Arabia and the most important of these in the 
Hijaz were the temples of three “daughters of God” as some of their 
worshippers claimed them to be, al-Lat, al-‘Uzzah and Manat. From his 
earliest years, like the rest of the Arabs of Yathrib, ‘Abd al-Muttalib had 
been brought up to revere Manat whose temple was at Qudayd on the Red 
Sea, almost due west of the oasis. More important for Quraysh was the 
shrine of al-‘Uzzah in the valley of Nakhlah, a camel day’s journey south of 
Mecca. Another day’s journey in the same direction brought the devotee to 
Ta’if, a walled town on a luxuriant green tableland, inhabited by Thaqlf, a 
branch of the great Arab tribe of Hawazin. Al-Lat was “the lady of Ta’if”, 
and her idol was housed in a rich temple. As guardians of this, Thaqlf liked 
to think of themselves as the counterpart of Quraysh; and Quraysh went 
so far as to speak currently of “the two cities” when they meant Mecca and 
Ta’if. But despite the wonderful climate and fertility of “the Garden of the 
Hijaz”, as Ta’if was called, its people were not unjealous of the barren 
valley to their north, for they knew in their hearts that their temple, 
however much they might promote it, could never compare with the 
House of God. Nor did they altogether wish it were otherwise, for they too 
were descended from Ishmael and had roots in Mecca. Their sentiments 
were mixed and sometimes conflicting. Quraysh on the other hand were 
jealous of no one. They knew that they lived at the centre of the world and 
that they had in their midst a magnet capable of drawing pilgrims from all 
points of the compass. It was up to them to do nothing that might diminish 
the good relationship which had been established between themselves and 
the outlying tribes. 

‘Abd al-Muttalib’s office as host of pilgrims to the Ka‘bah imposed on 
him an acute awareness of these things. His function was an intertribal 
one, and it was shared to a certain extent by all Quraysh. The pilgrims 
must be made to feel that Mecca was a home from home, and welcoming 



16 Muhammad 


them meant welcoming what they worshipped and never failing to show 
honour to the idols they brought with them. The justification and author¬ 
ity for accepting idols and believing in their efficacy was that of tradition: 
their fathers and grandfathers and great-grandfathers had done so. None 
the less, God was, for ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the great reality; and he was no 
doubt nearer to the religion of Abraham than most of his contemporaries 
of Quraysh and Khuza‘ah and Hawazin and other Arab tribes. 

But there were - and always had been - a few who maintained the full 
purity of Abrahamic worship. They alone realised that far from being 
traditional, idol worship was an innovation - a danger to be guarded 
against. It only needed a longer view of history to see that Hubal was no 
better than the golden calf of the son’s of Israel. These Hunafa’, 1 as they 
called themselves, would have nothing to do with the idols, whose 
presence in Mecca they looked on as a profanation and a pollution. Their 
refusal to compromise and their frequent outspokenness relegated them to 
the fringe of Meccan society where they were respected, tolerated or 
ill-treated, partly according to their personalities and partly according to 
whether their clans were prepared to protect them or not. 

‘Abd al-Muttalib knew four of the Hunafa’, and one of the more 
respected of them, Waraqah by name, was the son of his second cousin 
Nawfal, 2 of the clan of Asad. Waraqah had become a Christian; and there 
was a belief among Christians of those parts that the coming of a Prophet 
was imminent. This belief may not have been widespread, but it was 
supported by one or two venerable dignitaries of eastern churches and also 
by the astrologers and soothsayers. As to the Jews, for whom such a belief 
was easier, since for them the line of Prophets ended only with the Messiah, 
they were almost unanimous in their expectancy of a Prophet. Their rabbis 
and other wise men assured them that one was at hand; many of the 
predicted signs of his coming had already been fulfilled; and he would, of 
course, be a Jew, for they were the chosen people. The Christians, 
Waraqah amongst them, had their doubts about this; they saw no reason 
why he should not be an Arab. The Arabs stood in need of a Prophet even 
more than the Jews, who at least still followed the religion of Abraham 
inasmuch as they worshipped the One God and did not have idols; and 
who but a Prophet would be capable of ridding the Arabs of their worship 
of false gods? In a wide circle round the Ka‘bah, at some distance from it, 
there were 3 60 idols; and in addition to these almost every house in Mecca 
had its god, an idol large or small which was the centre of the household. 
As his last act on leaving the premises, especially if it was for a journey, a 
man would go to the idol and stroke it in order to obtain blessings from it, 
and such was the first act on returning home. Nor was Mecca exceptional 
in this respect, for these practices prevailed throughout most of Arabia. 
There were, it was true, some well established Arab Christian communities 
to the south, in Najran and the Yemen, as well as to the north near the 
frontiers of Syria; but God’s latest intervention, which had transformed 
the Mediterranean and vast tracts of Europe, had made, in nearly six 

1 The word hantf, plural hunafa has the sense of “orthodox”. See K. VI, 161. 

2 Not to be confused with Hashim’s brother Nawfal, after whom the clan of Nawfal was 
named. 



The Need for a Prophet 17 

hundred years, practically no impact on the pagan society which centred 
on the Meccan shrine. The Arabs of the Hijaz and of the great plain of 
Najd to its east seemed impervious to the message of the Gospels. 

Not that Quraysh and the other pagan tribes were hostile to Christian¬ 
ity. Christians sometimes came to do honour to the Sanctuary of Abraham, 
and they were made welcome like all the rest. Moreover one Christian had 
been allowed and even encouraged to paint an icon of the Virgin Mary and 
the child Christ on an inside wall of the Ka‘bah, where it sharply 
contrasted with all the other paintings. But Quraysh were more or less 
insensitive to this contrast: for them it was simply a question of increasing 
the multitude of idols by another two; and it was partly their tolerance that 
made them so impenetrable. 

Unlike most of his tribe, Waraqah could read and had made a study of 
the scriptures and of theology. He was therefore capable of seeing that in 
one of Christ’s promises, generally interpreted by Christians as referring to 
the miracle of Pentecost, there were none the less certain elements which 
did not fit that miracle and must be taken to refer to something else - 
something which had not yet been fulfilled. But the language was cryptic: 
what was the meaning of the words: he shall not speak of himself but 
whatsoever he shall hear , that shall he speak. 1 

Waraqah had a sister named Qutaylah who was very close to him. He 
often spoke to her about these things, and his words had made so great an 
impression on her that thoughts of the expected Prophet were often in her 
mind. Could it be that he was already in their midst? 

Once the sacrifice of the camels had been accepted, ‘Abd al-Muttalib made 
up his mind to find a wife for his reprieved son, and after some considera¬ 
tion the choice fell on Aminah, the daughter of Wahb, a grandson of 
Zuhrah, the brother of Qusayy. 

Wahb had been chief of Zuhrah but had died some years previously and 
Aminah was now a ward of his brother Wuhayb, who had succeeded him 
as chief of the clan. Wuhayb himself also had a daughter of marriageable 
age, Halah by name, and when ‘Abd al-Muttalib had arranged that his son 
should marry Aminah, he asked that Halah should be given in marriage to 
himself. Wuhayb agreed, and all preparations were made for the double 
wedding to take place at the same time. On the appointed day, ‘Abd 
al-Muttalib took his son by the hand, and they set off together for the 
dwellings of the Bani Zuhrah. 2 On the way they had to pass the dwellings 
of the Bani Asad; and it so happened that Qutaylah, the sister of Waraqah, 
was standing at the entrance to her house, perhaps deliberately in order to 
see what could be seen, for everyone in Mecca knew of the great wedding 
which was about to take place. ‘Abd al-Muttalib was now over seventy 
years old, but he was still remarkably young for his age in every respect; 
and the slow approach of the two bridegrooms, their natural grace 
enhanced by the solemnity of the occasion, was indeed an impressive sight. 
But as they drew near, Qutaylah had eyes only for the younger man. ‘Abd 
Allah was, for beauty, the Joseph of his times. Even the oldest men and 

1 StJohni6:i3- 

2 The sons (i.e. descendants) of Zuhrah; bani is the plural of ibn, son. 



18 Muhammad 


women of Quraysh could not remember having seen his equal. He was 
now in his twenty-fifth year, in the full flower of his youth. But Qutaylah 
was struck above all - as she had been on other occasions, but never so 
much as now — by the radiance which lit his face and which seemed to her 
to shine from beyond this world. Could it be that ‘Abd Allah was the 
expected Prophet? Or was he to be the father of the Prophet? 

They had now just passed her, and overcome by a sudden impulse she 
said “O ‘Abd Allah”. His father let go his hand as if to tell him to speak to 
his cousin. ‘Abd Allah turned back to face her, and she asked him where he 
was going. “With my father,” he said simply, not out of reticence but 
because he felt sure that she must know that he was on his way to his 
wedding. “Take me here and now as thy wife,” she said, “and thou shalt 
have as many camels as those that were sacrificed in thy stead.” “I am with 
my father,” he replied. “I cannot act against his wishes, and I cannot leave 
him.” 1 

The marriages took place according to plan, and the two couples stayed 
for some days in the house of Wuhayb. During that time ‘Abd Allah went 
to fetch something from his own house, and again he met Qutaylah, the 
sister of Waraqah. Her eyes searched his face with such earnestness that he 
stopped beside her, expecting her to speak. When she remained silent, he 
asked her why she did not say to him what she had said the day before. She 
answered him, saying: “The light hath left thee that was with thee 
yesterday. Today thou canst not fulfil the need I had of thee.” 2 

The year of the marriages was ad 5 69. The year following this has been 
known ever since as the Year of the Elephant, and it was momentous for 
more than one reason. 

1 I.I.100. 2 1 .1.101. 



VII 


The Year of the 
Elephant 

4 T that time the Yemen was under the rule of Abyssinia, and an 
L\ Abyssinian named Abrahah was vice-regent. He built a magnificent 
JL JL cathedral in San‘a’, hoping thereby to make it supersede Mecca as 
the great place of pilgrimage for all Arabia. He had marble brought to it 
from one of the derelict palaces of the Queen of Sheba, and he set up 
crosses in it of gold and of silver, and pulpits of ivory and ebony, and he 
wrote to his master, the Negus: “I have built thee a church, O King, the like 
of which was never built for any king before thee; and I shall not rest until I 
have diverted unto it the pilgrimage of the Arabs.” Nor did he make any 
secret of his intention, and great was the anger of the tribes throughout 
Hijaz and Najd. Finally a man of Kinanah, a tribe akin to Quraysh, went to 
San‘a’ for the deliberate purpose of defiling the church, which he did one 
night and then returned safely to his people. 

When Abrahah heard of this he vowed that in revenge he would raze the 
Ka‘bah to the ground; and having made his preparations he set off for 
Mecca with a large army, in the van of which he placed an elephant. Some 
of the Arab tribes north of San‘a’ attempted to bar his way, but the 
Abyssinians put them to flight and captured their leader, Nufayl of the 
tribe of Khath‘am. By way of ransom for his life, he offered to act as 
guide. 

When the army reached Ta’if, the men of Thaqlf came out to meet them, 
afraid that Abrahah might destroy their temple of al-Lat in mistake for the 
Ka‘bah. They hastened to point out to him that he had not yet reached his 
goal, and they offered him a guide for the remainder of his march. 
Although he already had Nufayl, he accepted their offer, but the man died 
on the way, about two miles from Mecca, at a place called Mughammis, 
and they buried him. Afterwards the Arabs took to stoning his grave, and 
the people who live there still stone it to this day. 

Abrahah halted at Mughammis, and sent on a detachment of horse to 
the outskirts of Mecca. They took what they could on the way, and sent 
back their plunder to Abrahah, including two hundred camels which were 
the property of ‘Abd al-Muttalib. Quraysh and other neighbouring tribes 
held a council of war, and decided that it was useless to try to resist the 
enemy. Meanwhile Abrahah sent a messenger to Mecca, bidding him to 
ask for the chief man there. He was to tell him they had not come to fight 



zo Muhammad 


but only to destroy the temple, and if he wished to avoid all bloodshed he 
must come to the Abyssinian camp. 

There had been no official chief of Quraysh since the time when their 
privileges and responsibilities had been divided between the houses of 
‘Abd ad-Dar and ‘Abdu Manaf. But most people had their opinion as to 
which of the chiefs of the clans was in fact if not by right the leading man of 
Mecca, and on this occasion the messenger was directed to the house of 
‘Abd al-Muttalib who, together with one of his sons, went back with the 
messenger to the camp. When Abrahah saw him he was so impressed by his 
appearance that he rose from his royal seat to greet him and then sat beside 
him on the carpet, telling his interpreter to inquire if he had a favour to ask. 
‘Abd al-Muttalib replied that the army had taken two hundred of his 
camels and he asked that they should be returned to him. Abrahah was 
somewhat surprised at the request, and said that he was disappointed in 
him, that he should be thinking of his camels rather than his religion which 
they had now come to destroy. ‘Abd al-Muttalib replied: “I am the lord of 
the camels, and the temple likewise hath a lord who will defend it.” “He 
cannot defend it against me,” said Abrahah. “We shall see,” said ‘Abd 
al-Muttalib. “But give me my camels.” And Abrahah gave orders for the 
camels to be returned. 

‘Abd al-Muttalib returned to Quraysh and advised them to withdraw to 
the hills above the town. Then he went with some of his family and others 
to the Sanctuary. They stood beside him, praying to God for His help 
against Abrahah and his army, and he himself took hold of the metal ring 
in the middle of the Ka‘bah door and said: “O God, thy slave protecteth his 
house. Protect Thou Thy House!” Having thus prayed, he went with the 
others to join the rest of Quraysh in the hills at points where they could see 
what took place in the valley below. 

The next morning Abrahah made ready to march into the town, 
intending to destroy the Ka‘bah and then return to San‘a’ by the way they 
had come. The elephant, richly caparisoned, was led into the front of the 
army, which was already drawn up; and when the mighty animal reached 
his position his keeper Unays turned him the same w r ay as the troops were 
turned, that is towards Mecca. But Nufayl, the reluctant guide, had 
marched most of the way in the van of the army with Unays, and had 
learned from him some of the words of command which the elephant 
understood; and while the head of Unays was turned to watch for the 
signal to advance, Nufayl took hold of the great ear and conveyed into it a 
subdued but intense imperative to kneel. Thereupon, to the surprise and 
dismay of Abrahah and the troops, the elephant slowly and deliberately 
knelt himself down to the ground. Unays ordered him to rise, but Nufayl’s 
word had coincided with a command more powerful than that of any man, 
and the elephant would not move. They did everything they could to bring 
him to his feet; they even beat him about the head with iron bars and stuck 
iron hooks into his belly, but he remained like a rock. Then they tried the 
strategem of making the whole army turn about and march a few paces in 
the direction of the Yemen. He at once rose to his feet, turned round and 
followed them. Hopefully they turned round about again, and he also 
turned, but no sooner was he facing Mecca than again he knelt. 



The Year of the Elephant 


zi 


This was the clearest of portents not to move one step further forward, 
but Abrahah was blinded by his personal ambition for the sanctuary he 
had built and by his determination to destroy its great rival. If they had 
turned back then, perhaps they would all have escaped disaster. But 
suddenly it was too late: the western sky grew black, and a strange sound 
was heard; its volume increased as a great wave of darkness swept upon 
them from the direction of the sea, and the air above their heads, as high as 
they could see, was full of birds. Survivors said that they flew with a flight 
like that of swifts, and each bird had three pebbles the size of dried peas, 
one in its beak and one between the claws of each foot. They swooped to 
and fro over the ranks, pelting as they swooped, and the pebbles were so 
hard and launched with such velocity that they pierced even coats of mail. 
Every stone found its mark and killed its man, for as soon as a body was 
struck its flesh began to rot, quickly in some cases, more gradually in 
others. Not everyone was hit, and amongst those spared were Unays and 
the elephant, but all were terror-stricken. A few remained in the Hijaz and 
earned a livelihood by shepherding and other work. But the main part of 
the army returned in disorder to San‘a’: Many died by the wayside, and 
many others, Abrahah included, died soon after their return. As to Nufayl, 
he had slipped away from the army while all attention was concentrated on 
the elephant, and he made his way unscathed to the hills above Mecca. 

After that day Quraysh were called by the Arabs “the people of God”, 
and they were held in even greater respect than before, because God had 
answered their prayers and saved the Ka‘bah from destruction. They are 
still honoured, but rather on account of a second event - no doubt not 
unconnected with the first - which took place in that same Year of the 
Elephant. 

‘Abd Allah, the son of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, was not in Mecca at the time of 
the miracle of the birds. He had gone for trade to Palestine and Syria with 
one of the caravans; and on his way home he had lodged with his 
grandmother’s family in Yathrib, and there he had fallen ill. The caravan 
went on without him to Mecca and when it brought the news of his illness 
‘Abd al-Muttalib sent Harith to accompany his brother home as soon as he 
should be well enough to travel. But when Harith arrived at the house of 
his Yathrib cousins they answered his greetings with commiserations, and 
he knew at once that his brother was dead. 

There was great grief in Mecca when Harith returned. Aminah’s one 
consolation was the unborn child of her dead husband, and her solace 
increased as the time of her delivery drew near. She was conscious of a light 
within her, and one day it shone forth from her so intensely that she could 
see the castles of Bostra in Syria. And she heard a voice say to her: “Thou 
carriest in thy womb the lord of this people; and when he is born say: ‘I 
place him beneath the protection of the One, from the evil of every envier’; 
then name him Muhammad.” 1 

Some weeks later the child was born. Aminah was in the home of her 
uncle, and she sent word to ‘Abd al-Muttalib, asking him to come to see his 


1 I.I. 102. 



22 Muhammad 


grandson. He took the boy in his arms and carried him to the Sanctuary 
and into the Holy House, where he prayed a prayer of thanksgiving to God 
for this gift. Then he brought him once more to his mother, but on the way 
he showed him to his own household. He himself was shortly to have 
another son, by Aminah’s cousin Halah. At the moment his youngest son 
was the three-year-old ‘Abbas who now met him at the door of his house. 
“This is thy brother; kiss him,” he said, holding out to him the new-born 
babe, and ‘Abbas kissed him. 



VIII 


The Desert 


I T was the custom of all the great families of Arab towns to send their 
sons, soon after their birth, into the desert, to be suckled and weaned 
and spend part of their childhood amongst one of the Bedouin tribes. 
Nor had Mecca any reason for being an exception, since epidemics were 
not infrequent and the rate of infant mortality was high. But it was not only 
the desert’s fresh air that they wished their sons to imbibe. That was for 
their bodies, but the desert had also its bounty for souls. Quraysh had only 
recently taken to the sedentary life. Until Qusayy had told them to build 
themselves houses round the Sanctuary they had been more or less 
nomadic. Fixed settlements were perhaps inevitable, but they were danger¬ 
ous. Their ancestors’ way of life had been the nobler one, the life of 
tent-dwellers, often on the move. Nobility and freedom were inseparable, 
and the nomad was free. In the desert a man was conscious of being the 
lord of space, and in virtue of that lordship he escaped in a sense from the 
domination of time. By striking camp he sloughed off his yesterdays; and 
tomorrow seemed less of a fatality if its where as well as its when had yet to 
come. But the townsman was a prisoner; and to be fixed in one place, — 
yesterday, today, tomorrow — was to be a target for time, the ruiner of all 
things. Towns were places of corruption. Sloth and slovenliness lurked in 
the shadow of their walls, ready to take the edge off a man’s alertness and 
vigilance. Everything decayed there, even language, one of man’s most 
precious possessions. Few of the Arabs could read, but beauty of speech 
was a virtue which all Arab parents desired for their children. A man’s 
worth was largely assessed by his eloquence, and the crown of eloquence 
was poetry. To have a great poet in the family was indeed something to be 
proud of; and the best poets were nearly always from one or another of the 
desert tribes, for it was in the desert that the spoken language was nearest 
to poetry. 

So the bond with the desert had to be renewed in every generation — fresh 
air for the breast, pure Arabic for the tongue, freedom for the soul; and 
many of the sons of Quraysh were kept as long as eight years in the desert, 
so that it might make a lasting impression upon them, though a lesser 
number of years was enough for that. 

Some of the tribes had a high reputation for nursing and rearing 
children, and amongst these were the Bani Sa‘d ibn Bakr, an outlying 
branch of Hawazin, whose territory lay to the south-east of Mecca. 
Aminah was in favour of entrusting her son to the care of a woman of this 



24 Muhammad 

tribe. They came periodically to Quraysh for nurselings, and some were 
expected shortly. Their journey to Mecca on this occasion was described in 
after-years by one of their number, Halimah, the daughter of Abu 
Dhu‘ayb, who was accompanied by her husband, Harith, and a recently 
born son of their own whom she was nursing. “It was a year of drought,” 
she said, “and we had nothing left. I set forth on a grey she-ass of mine, and 
we had with us an old she-camel which could not yield one drop of milk. 
We were kept awake all night by our son who was wailing for hunger, for I 
had not enough in my breasts to feed him; and that ass of mine was so weak 
and so emaciated that I often kept the others waiting.” 

She told how they went on their way with nothing to hope for except a 
fall of rain which would enable the camel and the ass to graze enough for 
their udders to swell a little, but by the time they reached Mecca no rain 
had fallen. Once there they set about looking for nurselings, and Aminah 
offered her son first to one and then to another until finally she had tried 
them all and they had all refused. “That”, said Halimah, “was because we 
hoped for some favour from the boy’s father. ‘An orphan!’ we said. ‘What 
will his mother and his grandfather be able to do for us?’” Not that they 
would have wanted direct payment for their services, since it was consid¬ 
ered dishonourable for a woman to take a fee for suckling a child. The 
recompense they hoped for, though less direct and less immediate, was of a 
far wider scope. This interchange of benefits between townsman and 
nomad was in the nature of things, for each was poor where the other was 
rich, and rich where the other was poor. The nomad had the age-old 
God-given way of life to offer, the way of Abel. The sons of Cain - for it 
was Cain who built the first villages — had possessions and power. The 
advantage for the Bedouin was to make an enduring link with one of the 
great families. The foster-mother gained a new son who would look on her 
as a second mother and feel a filial duty to her for the rest of his life. He 
would also feel himself a brother to her own children. Nor was the 
relationship merely a nominal one. The Arabs hold that the breast is one of 
the channels of heredity and that a suckling drinks qualities into his nature 
from the nurse who suckles him. But little or nothing could be expected 
from the foster-child himself until he grew up, and meantime his father 
could normally be relied on to fulfil the duties of his son. A grandfather was 
too remote; and in this case they would have known that ‘Abd al-Muttalib 
was an old man who could not reasonably be expected to live much longer. 
When he died, his sons, not his grandson, would be his heirs. As to 
Aminah, she was poor; and as to the boy himself, his father had been too 
young to have acquired wealth. He had left his son no more than five 
camels, a small flock of sheep and goats, and one slave girl. ‘Abd Allah’s 
son was indeed a child of one of the great families; but he was by far the 
poorest nurseling that these women were offered that year. 

On the other side, though the foster-parents were not expected to be 
rich, they must not be too poverty-stricken, and it was evident that 
Halimah and her husband were poorer than any of their companions. 
Whenever the choice lay between her and another, the other was preferred 
and chosen; and it was not long before every one of the Bani Sa‘d women 
except Halimah had been entrusted with a babe. Only the poorest nurse 



The Desert 2.5 

was without a nurseling; and only the poorest nurseling was without a 
nurse. 

“When we decided to leave Mecca,” said Hallmah, “I told my husband: 
‘I hate to return in the company of my friends without having taken a babe 
to suckle. I shall go to that orphan and take him.’ ‘As thou wilt,’ he said. ‘It 
may be that God will bless us in him.’ So I went and took him, for no reason 
save that I could find none but him. I carried him back to where our mounts 
were stationed, and no sooner had I put him in my bosom than my breasts 
overflowed with milk for him. He drank his fill, and with him his 
foster-brother drank likewise his fill. Then they both slept; and my 
husband went to that old she-camel of ours, and lo! her udders were full. 
He milked her and drank of her milk and I drank with him until we could 
drink no more and our hunger was satisfied. We spent the best of nights, 
and in the morning my husband said to me: ‘By God, Hallmah, it is a 
blessed creature that thou hast taken.’ ‘That is indeed my hope/ I said. 
Then we set out, and I rode my ass and carried him with me on her back. 
She outstripped the whole troop, nor could any of their asses keep pace 
with her. ‘Confound thee!’ they said to me, ‘Wait for us! Is not this ass of 
thine the same ass that thou didst come on?’ ‘Yea by God,’ I said, ‘she is the 
very same.’ ‘Some wonder hath befallen her,’ they said. 

“We reached our tents in the Bani Sa‘d country, and I know of no place 
on God’s earth more barren than that then was. But after we brought him 
to live with us, my flock would come home to me replete at every eventide 
and full of milk. We milked them and drank, when others had no drop of 
milk; and our neighbours would say to their shepherds: ‘Out upon you, go 
graze your flocks where he grazeth his/ meaning my shepherd. Yet still 
their flocks came hungry home, yielding no milk, while mine came well fed, 
with milk in plenty; and we ceased not to enjoy this increase and this 
bounty from God until the babe’s two years had passed, and I weaned 
him. 1 

“He was growing well,” she continued, “and none of the other boys 
could match him for growth. By the time he was two years old he was a 
well made child, and we took him again to his mother, although we were 
eager that he should stay with us for the blessings he brought us. So I said to 
her: ‘Leave my little son with me until he grow stronger, for I fear lest he be 
stricken with the plague of Mecca.’ And we importuned her until she gave 
him once more into our keeping and we brought him again to our home. 

“One day, several months after our return, when he and his brother 
were with some lambs of ours behind our tents, his brother came running 
to us and said: ‘That Qurayshite brother of mine! Two men clothed in 
white have taken him and have laid him down and opened his breast and 
they are stirring it with their hands.’ So I and his father went to him and we 
found him standing, but his face was very pale. We drew him to us and 
said: ‘What aileth thee, my son?’ He said: ‘Two men clothed in white came 
to me and laid me down and opened my breast and searched it for I know 
not what.’” 2 

Halimah and Harith her husband looked this way and that, but there 


I. 1 .105. 2 ibid. 



2 6 Muhammad 


was no sign of the men; nor was there any blood or any wound to bear out 
what the two boys had said. No amount of questioning would make them 
take back their words or modify them in any respect. Yet there was not 
even the trace of a scar on the breast of their foster-child nor any blemish 
on his perfect little body. The only unusual feature was in the middle of his 
back between his shoulders: a small but distinct oval mark where the flesh 
was slightly raised, as it were from the impress of a cupping glass; but that 
had been there at his birth. 

In after-years he was able to describe the event more fully: “There came 
unto me two men, clothed in white, with a gold basin full of snow. Then 
they laid hold upon me, and splitting open my breast they brought forth 
my heart. This likewise they split open and took from it a black clot which 
they cast away. Then they washed my heart and my breast with the 
snow.” 1 He also said: “Satan toucheth every son of Adam the day his 
mother beareth him, save only Mary and her son.” 2 

1 I.S. 1/1,96 2 B. LX, 54. 



Two Bereavements 


H ALIMAH and Harith were convinced that the boys had been 
speaking the truth, and they were exceedingly shaken in conse¬ 
quence. Harith feared that their foster-son had been possessed by 
an evil spirit or smitten by some spell, and he told his wife to take him with 
all speed to his mother before the harm he had suffered became apparent 
in him. So Hallmah took him once more to Mecca, intending to say noth¬ 
ing about the real reason for her change of mind. But the change was too 
abrupt and Aminah, not to be deceived, finally compelled her to recount 
the whole story. Having heard it, she dismissed Hallmah’s fears, saying: 
“Great things are in store for my little son.” Then she told her of her 
pregnancy, and of the light she had been conscious of carrying within her. 
Hallmah was reassured, but this time Aminah decided to keep her son. 
“Leave him with me,” she said, “and a good journey home.” 

The boy lived happily in Mecca with his mother for about three years, 
winning the affection of his grandfather and his uncles and aunts, and his 
many cousins with whom he played. Particularly dear to him were 
Hamzah and Safiyyah, the children of ‘Abd al-Muttalib’s last marriage 
which had taken place on the same day as that of Muhammad’s parents. 
Hamzah was his own age, Safiyyah a little younger—his uncle and his aunt 
through his father, his cousins through his mother — and a powerful and 
lasting bond was formed between the three of them. 

When he was six years old, his mother decided to take him on a visit to 
his kinsmen in Yathrib. They joined one of the northbound caravans, 
riding on two camels, Aminah on one of them and he on the other with his 
devoted slave girl, Barakah. In later life he recounted how he learned to 
swim in a pool which belonged to his Khazrajite kinsmen with whom they 
stayed, and how the boys taught him to fly a kite. But not long after they 
had set out on their return journey Aminah fell ill and they were obliged to 
halt, letting the caravan go on without them. After some days she died - it 
was at Abwa’, not far from Yathrib — and there she was buried. Barakah 
did what she could to console the boy, now doubly an orphan, and in the 
company of some travellers she brought him once more to Mecca. 

His grandfather now took complete charge of him, and it soon became 
clear that his special love for ‘Abd Allah had been transferred to ‘Abd 
Allah’s son. ‘Abd al-Muttalib was always happy to be near the Ka‘bah, as 
when it had been his wont to sleep in the Hijr at the time when he had been 
ordered to dig Zamzam. So his family used to spread him a couch every day 
in the shadow of the Holy House, and out of respect for their father none of 



28 Muhammad 


his sons, not even Hamzah, would ever venture to sit on it; but his little 
grandson had no such scruples, and when his uncles told him to sit 
elsewhere ‘Abd al-Muttalib said: “Let my son be. For by God, a great 
future is his.” He would seat him beside him on the couch, and stroke his 
back; and it always pleased him to watch what he was doing. Almost every 
day they could be seen together, hand in hand, at the Ka‘bah or elsewhere 
in Mecca. ‘Abd al-Muttalib even took Muhammad with him when he 
went to attend the Assembly where the chief men of the town, all over 
forty, would meet to discuss various matters, nor did the eighty-year-old 
man refrain from asking the seven-year-old boy his opinion on this or that; 
and when called to question by his fellow dignitaries, he would always 
say: “A great future is in store for my son.” 

Two years after the death of his mother, the orphan was bereaved of his 
grandfather. When he was dying, ‘Abd al-Muttalib entrusted his grandson 
to Abu Talib, who was full brother to the boy’s father; and Abu Talib 
prolonged the affection and the kindness that his nephew had received 
from the old man. Henceforth he was as one of his own sons, and his wife 
Fatimah 1 did all she could to replace the boy’s mother. In after-years 
Muhammad used to say of her that she would have let her own children go 
hungry rather than him. 

1 Like Abu Talib she was a grandchild of Hashim, the daughter of his son Asad, 
half-brother of ‘Abd al-Muttalib. 



X 


Bahira the Monk 


T HE fortunes of ‘Abd al-Muttalib had waned during the last part of 
his life, and what he left at his death amounted to no more than a 
small legacy for each of his sons. Some of them, especially ‘Abd 
al-TJzzah who was known as Abu Lahab, had acquired wealth of their 
own. But Abu Talib was poor, and his nephew felt obliged to do what he 
could to earn his own livelihood. This he did mostly by pasturing sheep 
and goats, and he would thus spend day after day alone in the hills above 
Mecca or on the slopes of the valleys beyond. But his uncle took him 
sometimes with him on his travels and on one occasion when Muhammad 
was nine, or according to others twelve, they went with a merchant 
caravan as far as Syria. At Bostra, near one of the halts where the Meccan 
caravan always stopped, there was a cell which had been lived in by a 
Christian monk for generation after generation. When one died, another 
took his place and inherited all that was in the cell including some old 
manuscripts. Amongst these was one which contained the prediction of the 
coming of a Prophet to the Arabs; and Bahira, the monk who now lived in 
the cell, was well versed in the contents of this book, which interested him 
all the more because, like Waraqah, he too felt that the coming of the 
prophet would be in his lifetime. 

He had often seen the Meccan caravan approach and halt not far from 
his cell, but as this one came in sight his attention was struck by something 
the like of which he had never seen before: a small low-hanging cloud 
moved slowly above their heads so that it was always between the sun and 
one or two of the travellers. With intense interest he watched them draw 
near. But suddenly his interest changed to amazement, for as soon as they 
halted the cloud ceased to move, remaining stationary over the tree 
beneath which they took shelter, while the tree itself lowered its branches 
over them, so that they were doubly in the shade. Bahira knew that such a 
portent, though unobtrusive, was of high significance. Only some great 
spiritual presence could explain it, and immediately he thought of the 
expected Prophet. Could it be that he had at last come, and was amongst 
these travellers? 

The cell had recently been stocked with provisions, and putting to¬ 
gether all he had, he sent word to the caravan: “Men of Quraysh, I have 
prepared food for you, and I would that ye should come to me, every one of 
you, young and old, bondman and freeman.” So they came to his cell, but 
despite what he had said they left Muhammad to look after their camels 
and their baggage. As they approached, Bahira scanned their faces one by 



30 Muhammad 

one. But he could see nothing which corresponded to the description in his 
book, nor did there seem to be any man amongst them who was adequate 
to the greatness of the two miracles. Perhaps they had not all come. “Men 
of Quraysh,” he said, “let none of you stay behind.” “There is not one that 
hath been left behind,” they answered, “save only a boy, the youngest of us 
all.” “Treat him not so” said Bahira, “but call him to come, and let him 
be present with us at this meal.” Abu Talib and the others reproached 
themselves for their thoughtlessness. “We are indeed to blame,” said one 
of them, “that the son of ‘Abd Allah should have been left behind and not 
brought to share this feast with us,” whereupon he went to him and 
embraced him and brought him to sit with the people. 

One glance at the boy’s face was enough to explain the miracles to 
Bahira; and looking at him attentively throughout the meal he noticed 
many features of both face and body which corresponded to what was in 
his book. So when they had finished eating, the monk went to his youngest 
guest and asked him questions about his way of life and about his sleep, 
and about his affairs in general. Muhammad readily informed him of these 
things for the man was venerable and the questions were courteous and 
benevolent; nor did he hesitate to draw off his cloak when finally the monk 
asked if he might see his back. Bahira had already felt certain, but now he 
was doubly so, for there, between his shoulders, was the very mark he 
expected to see, the seal of prophethood even as it was described in his 
book, in the selfsame place. He turned to Abu Talib: “What kinship hath 
this boy with thee?” he said. “He is my son,” said Abu Talib. “He is not thy 
son,” said the monk; “it cannot be that this boy’s father is alive.” “He is 
my brother’s son,” said Abu Talib. “Then what of his father?” said the 
monk. “He died,” said the other, “when the boy was still in his mother’s 
womb.” “That is the truth,” said Bahira. “Take thy brother’s son back to 
his country, and guard him against the Jews, for by God, if they see him 
and know of him that which I know, they will contrive evil against him. 
Great things are in store for this brother’s son of thine.” 



XI 

A Pact of Chivalry 


W HEN he had finished his trading in Syria, Abu Talib returned to 
Mecca with his nephew, who continued his solitary life as 
before. But his uncles saw to it that he, as also ‘Abbas and 
Hamzah, had some training in the use of weapons of war. Hamzah was 
clearly destined to be a man of mighty stature, endowed with great 
physical strength. He was already a good swordsman and a good wrestler. 
Muhammad was of average height and average strength. He had a marked 
aptitude for archery, and gave every promise of being an excellent 
bowman, like his great ancestors, Abraham and Ishmael. A powerful 
asset for this lay in the strength of his eyesight: he was reputed to be 
able to count no less than twelve of the stars of the constellation of the 
Pleiades. 

In those years Quraysh were not involved in any fighting except for a 
spasmodic and intermittent conflict which came to be known as the 
sacrilegious war because it had started in one of the sacred_ months. A 
profligate of Kinanah had treacherously murdered a man of ‘Amir, one of 
the Hawazin tribes of Najd, and had taken refuge in the impregnable 
fortress township of Khaybar. The sequence of events followed the usual 
desert pattern: honour demanded revenge, so the tribe of the murdered 
man attacked Kinanah, the tribe of the murderer, and Quraysh were 
involved, somewhat ingloriously, as allies of Kinanah. The conflict drag¬ 
ged on for three or four years in which there were only five days of actual 
fighting. The head of the clan of Hashim was at that time Zubayr, full 
brother, like Abu Talib, of Muhammad’s father. Zubayr and Abu Talib 
took their nephew with them to one of the first battles, but they said he was 
too young to fight. He was none the less allowed to help by gathering 
enemy arrows that had missed their mark and handing them to his uncles 
so that they could shoot them back. 1 But at one of the subsequent battles, 
where Quraysh and their allies had the worst of the day, he was allowed to 
show his skill as a bowman and was praised for his valour. 2 

The war helped to fan the growing discontent which every sedentary 
community tends to feel with the law of the desert. Most of the leading men 
of Quraysh had travelled to Syria and had seen for themselves the relative 
justice which prevailed in the Roman Empire. It was also possible in 
Abyssinia to have justice without recourse to fighting. But in Arabia there 
was no comparable system of law by which a victim of crime, or his family, 
might obtain redress; and it was natural that the sacrilegious war, like 


1 I.H. 119. 


2 I.S. 1/1,81. 



32 Muhammad 

other conflicts before it, should have set many minds thinking of ways and 
means to prevent the same thing from happening again. But this time the 
result was more than mere thoughts and words: as far as Quraysh were 
concerned, there was now a widespread readiness to take action; and their 
sense of justice was put to the test by a scandalous incident which took 
place in Mecca in the first few weeks after the end of the fighting. 

A merchant from the Yemeni port of Zabld had sold some valuable 
goods to a notable of the clan of Sahm. Having taken possession of these, 
the Sahmite refused to pay the promised price. The wronged merchant, as 
his wronger well knew, was a stranger to Mecca, and had no confederate 
or patron in all the city to whom he might go for help. But he was not to be 
overawed by the other man’s insolent self-assurance; and, taking his stand 
on the slope of Abu Qubays, he appealed to Quraysh as a whole, with loud 
and vehement eloquence, to see that justice was done. An immediate 
response came from most of those clans which had no traditional alliance 
with Sahm. Quraysh were bent above all on being united, regardless of 
clan; but within that union there was still an acute consciousness of the rift 
which had divided them, over the legacy of Qusayy, into two groups, the 
Scented Ones and the Confederates, and Sahm were of the Confederates. 
One of the leaders of the other group, and one of the wealthiest men in 
Mecca at this time, was the chief of Taym, ‘Abd Allah ibn Jud‘an, and he 
now offered his large house as a meeting-place for all lovers of justice. 
From amongst the Scented Ones, only the clans of ‘Abdu Shams and 
Nawfal were absent. Hashim, Muttalib, Zuhrah, Asad and Taym were all 
well represented, and they were joined by ‘Adi, which had been one of the 
Confederates. Having decided, after an earnest discussion, that it was 
imperative to found an order of chivalry for the furtherance of justice and 
the protection of the weak, they went in a body to the Ka‘bah where they 
poured water over the Black Stone, letting it flow into a receptacle. Then 
each man drank of the thus hallowed water; and with their right hands 
raised above their heads they vowed that henceforth, at every act of 
oppression in Mecca, they would stand together as one man on the side of 
the oppressed against the oppressor until justice was done, whether the 
oppressed were a man of Quraysh or one who had come from abroad. The 
Sahmite was thereupon compelled to pay his debt, nor did any of those 
clans which had abstained from the pact offer him their assistance. 

Together with the chief of Taym, Zubayr of Hashim was one of the 
founders of this order, and he brought with him his nephew Muhammad, 
who took part in the oath and who said in after-years: “I was present in the 
house of ‘Abd Allah ibn Jud‘an at so excellent a pact that I would not 
exchange my part in it for a herd of red camels; and if now, in Islam, I were 
summoned unto it, I would gladly respond.” 1 Another of those present was 
their host’s first cousin, Abu Quhafah of Taym, together with his son Abu 
Bakr, who was a year or two younger than Muhammad and who was to 
become his closest friend. 


1 I.I.86. 



XII 


Questions of 
Marriage 

M UHAMMAD had now passed his twentieth year, and as time 
went on he received more and more invitations to join one or 
another of his kinsmen on their travels abroad. Finally the day 
came when he was asked to take charge of the goods of a merchant who 
was unable to travel himself, and his success in this capacity led to other 
similar engagements. He was thus able to earn a better livelihood, and 
marriage became a possibility. 

His uncle and guardian Abu Talib had at that time three sons: the eldest, 
Talib, was about the same age as Muhammad himself; ‘Aqil was thirteen 
or fourteen; and Ja‘far was a boy of four. Muhammad was fond of 
children and liked to play with them; and he grew especially attached to 
Ja‘far who was a beautiful and intelligent child, and who responded to his 
cousin’s love with a devotion that proved to be lasting. Abu Talib also had 
daughters, and one of these was already of marriageable age. Her name 
was Fakhitah, but later she was called Umm Hani’, and it is by that name 
that she is always known. A great affection had grown up between her and 
Muhammad, who now asked his uncle to let him marry her. But Abu Talib 
had other plans for his daughter: his cousin Hubayrah, the son of his 
mother’s brother, of the clan of Makhzum, had likewise asked for the hand 
of Umm Hani’; and Hubayrah was not only a man of some substance but 
he was also, like Abu Talib himself, a gifted poet. Moreover the power of 
Makhzum in Mecca was as much on the increase as that of Hashim was on 
the wane; and it was to Hubayrah that Abu Talib married Umm Hani’. 
When his nephew mildly reproached him, he simply replied: “They have 
given us their daughters in marriage” — no doubt referring to his own 
mother — “and a generous man must requite generosity.” 1 The answer was 
unconvincing inasmuch as ‘Abd al-Muttalib had already more than repaid 
the debt in question by marrying two of his daughters, ‘Atikah and Barrah, 
to men of Makhzum. Muhammad no doubt took his uncle’s words as a 
courteous and kindly substitute for telling him plainly that he was not yet 
in a position to marry. That, at any rate, is what he now decided for 


1 I.S. VIII, 108. 



34 Muhammad 

himself; but unexpected circumstances were soon to induce him to change 
his mind. 

One of the richer merchants of Mecca was a woman - Khadljah, 
daughter of Khuwaylid, of the clan of Asad. She was first cousin to 
Waraqah, the Christian, and his sister Qutaylah, and like them she was a 
distant cousin to the sons of Hashim. She had already been married twice, 
and since the death of her second husband it had been her custom to hire 
men to trade on her behalf. Now Muhammad had come to be known 
throughout Mecca as al-Amln, the Reliable, the Trustworthy, the Honest, 
and this was initially owing to the reports of those who had entrusted their 
merchandise to him on various occasions. Khadljah had also heard much 
good of him from family sources; and one day she sent word to him, asking 
him to take some of her merchandise to Syria. His fee would be the double 
of the highest she had ever paid to a man of Quraysh; and she offered him, 
for the journey, the services of a lad of hers named Maysarah. He accepted 
what she proposed and accompanied by the lad he set off with her goods 
for the north. 

When they reached Bostra in the South of Syria, Muhammad took 
shelter beneath the shadow of a tree not far from the cell of a monk named 
Nestor. Since travellers’ halts often remain unchanged, it could have been 
the selfsame tree under which he had sheltered some fifteen years previous¬ 
ly on his way through Bostra with his uncle. Perhaps Bahlra had died and 
been replaced by Nestor. However that may be — for we only know what 
Maysarah reported — the monk came out of his cell and asked the lad: 
“Who is the man beneath that tree?” “He is a man of Quraysh,” said 
Maysarah, adding by way of explanation: “of the people who have 
guardianship of the Sanctuary.” “None other than a Prophet is sitting 
beneath that tree,” said Nestor. 1 

As they went on further into Syria, the words of Nestor sank deep into 
the soul of Maysarah, but they did not greatly surprise him, for he had 
become aware throughout the journey that he was in the company of a 
man unlike any other he had ever met. This was still further confirmed by 
something he saw on his way home: he had often noticed that the heat was 
strangely unoppressive, and one day towards noon it was given to him to 
have a brief but clear vision of two Angels shading Muhammad from the 
sun’s rays. 

On reaching Mecca they went to Khadijah’s house with the goods they 
had bought in the markets of Syria for the price of what they had sold. 
Khadljah sat listening to Muhammad as he described the journey and told 
her of the transactions he had made. These proved to be very profitable, for 


1 I.S. I/i, 83. According to Islamic tradition Muhammad is none other than the 
mysterious Shiloh, to whom would be transferred, “in the latter days”, the spiritual authority 
which until then had remained the prerogative of the Jews, Jesus himself having been the last 
Prophet of the line of Judah. The prophecy in question was made by Jacob immediately 
before his death: And Jacob called unto his sons and said, Gather yourselves together, that l 
may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days . . . The sceptre shall not depart from 
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the 
gathering of the people be. (Genesis 49: 1, 10). 



Questions of Marriage 3 5 


she was able to sell her newly acquired assets for almost the double of what 
had been paid for them. But such considerations were far from her 
thoughts, for all her attention was concentrated on the speaker himself. 
Muhammad was twenty-five years old. He was of medium stature, 
inclined to slimness, with a large head, broad shoulders and the rest of his 
body perfectly proportioned. His hair and beard were thick and black, not 
altogether straight but slightly curled. His hair reached midway between 
the lobes of his ears and his shoulders, and his beard was of a length to 
match. He had a noble breadth of forehead and the ovals of his large eyes 
were wide, with exceptionally long lashes and extensive brows, slightly 
arched but not joined. In most of the earliest descriptions his eyes are said 
to have been black, but according to one or two of these they were brown, 
or even light brown. His nose was aquiline and his mouth was wide and 
finely shaped - a comeliness always visible for although he let his beard 
grow, he never allowed the hair of his moustache to protrude over his 
upper lip. His skin was white, but tanned by the sun. In addition to his 
natural beauty there was a light on his face - the same which had shone 
from his father, but in the son it was more powerful - and this light was 
especially apparent on his broad forehead, and in his eyes, which were 
remarkably luminous. Khadljah knew that she herself was still beautiful, 
but she was fifteen years his elder. Would he none the less be prepared to 
marry her? 

As soon as he had gone, she consulted a woman friend of hers named 
Nufaysah, who offered to approach him on her behalf and, if possible, to 
arrange a marriage between them. Maysarah now came to his mistress and 
told her about the two Angels, and what the monk had said, whereupon 
she went to her cousin Waraqah and repeated these things to him. “If this 
be true, Khadljah,” he said, “then is Muhammad the prophet of our 
people. Long have I known that a prophet is to be expected, and his time 
hath now come.” 1 

Meanwhile Nufaysah came to Muhammad and asked him why he did 
not marry. “I have not the means to marry,” he answered. “But if thou 
wert given the means,” she said, “and if thou wert bidden to an alliance 
where there is beauty and property and nobility and abundance, wouldst 
thou not consent?” “Who is she?” he said. “Khadljah,” said Nufaysah. 
“And how could such a marriage be mine?” he said. “Leave that to me!” 
was her answer. “For my part,” he said, “I am willing.” 2 Nufaysah 
returned with these tidings to Khadljah, who then sent word to Mu¬ 
hammad asking him to come to her; and when he came she said to him: 
“Son of mine uncle, I love thee for thy kinship with me, and for that thou 
art ever in the centre, not being a partisan amongst the people for this or for 
that; and I love thee for thy trustworthiness and for the beauty of thy 
character and the truth of thy speech.” 3 Then she offered herself in 
marriage to him, and they agreed that he should speak to his uncles and she 
would speak to her uncle ‘Amr, the son of Asad, for Khuwaylid her father 
had died. It was Hamzah, despite his relative youth, whom the Hashimites 
delegated to represent them on this occasion, no doubt because he was the 


1 .1.12.1. 


2 I.S. 1/1,84. 


3 I.I.IZO. 



3 6 Muhammad 

most closely connected of them with the clan of Asad, for his full sister 
Safiyyah had recently married Khadljah’s brother ‘Awwam. So Hamzah 
went with his nephew to ‘Amr and asked for the hand of Khadijah; and it 
was agreed between them that Muhammad" should give her twenty 
she-camels as dowry. 



XIII 


The Household 


T HE bridegroom left his uncle’s house and went to live in the house 
of his bride. As well as being a wife, Khadljah was also a friend to 
her husband, the sharer of his inclinations and ideals to a remark¬ 
able degree. Their marriage was wondrously blessed, and fraught with 
great happiness, though not without sorrows of bereavement. She bore 
him six children, two sons and four daughters. Their eldest child was a son 
named Qasim, and Muhammad came to be known as Abu 1 -Qasim, the 
father of Qasim; but the boy died before his second birthday. The next 
child was a daughter whom they named Zaynab; and she was followed by 
three other daughters, Ruqayyah, Umm Kulthum, and Fatimah, and 
finally by another short-lived son. 

On the day of his marriage, Muhammad set free Barakah, the faithful 
slave he had inherited from his father; and on the same day Khadljah made 
him a gift of one of her own slaves, a youth of fifteen named Zayd. As to 
Barakah, they married her to a man of Yathrib to whom she bore a son, 
after whom she came to be known as Umm Ayman, the mother of Ayman. 
As to Zayd, he and some other youths had recently been bought at the 
great fair of ‘Ukaz by Khadljah’s nephew Hakim, the son of her brother 
Hizam; and the next time his aunt visited him Hakim had sent for his 
newly acquired slaves and invited her to choose one of them for herself. It 
was Zayd that she had chosen. 

Zayd was proud of his ancestry: his father Harithah was of the great 
northern tribe of Kalb whose territory lay on the plains between Syria and 
Iraq: his mother was a woman of the no less illustrious neighbouring tribe 
of Tayy, one of whose chieftains at that time was the poet-knight Hatim, 
famous throughout Arabia for his chivalry and his fabulous generosity. 
Several years had now passed since Zayd had been taken by his mother to 
visit her family, and the village where they were staying had been raided by 
some horsemen of the Bani Qayn, who had carried the boy off and sold 
him into slavery. Harithah, his father, had searched for him in vain; nor 
had Zayd seen any travellers from Kalb who could take a message from 
him to his parents. But the Ka‘bah drew pilgrims from all parts of Arabia, 
and one day during the holy season, several months after he had become 
Muhammad’s slave, he saw some men and women of his own tribe and 
clan in the streets of Mecca. If he had seen them the previous year, his 
feelings would have been very different. He had yearned for such an 
encounter; yet now that it had at last come it placed him in a quandary. He 
could not deliberately leave his family in ignorance of his whereabouts. But 



3 8 Muhammad 

what message could he send them? Whatever its gist, he knew, as a son of 
the desert, that nothing less than a poem would be adequate for such an 
occasion. He composed some verses which expressed something of his 
mind, but implied more than they expressed. Then he accosted the Kalbite 
pilgrims and, having told them who he was, he said: “Speak unto my 
family these lines, for well I know that they have sorrowed for me: 


Though I myself be far, yet take my words 
Unto my people: at the Holy House 
I dwell, amidst the places God hath hallowed. 

Set then aside the sorrows ye have grieved, 

Weary not camels, scouring the earth for me, 

For I, praise be to God, am in the best 
Of noble families, great in all its line.” 

When the pilgrims returned home with their tidings, Harithah at once set 
off for Mecca with his brother, Ka ‘b; and going to Muhammad they 
begged him to allow them to ransom Zayd, for as high a price as he might 
ask. “Let him choose,” said Muhammad, “and if he choose you, he is 
yours without ransom; and if he choose me, I am not the man to set any 
other above him who chooseth me.” Then he called Zayd and asked him if 
he knew the two men. “This is my father,” said the youth, “and this is mine 
uncle.” “Me thou knowest,” said Muhammad, “and thou hast seen my 
companionship unto thee, so choose thou between me and them.” But 
Zayd’s choice was already made and he said at once: “I would not choose 
any man in preference to thee. Thou art unto me as my father and mv 
mother.” “Out upon thee, O Zayd!” exclaimed the men of Kalb. “Wilt 
thou choose slavery above freedom, and above thy father and thine uncle 
and thy family?” “It is even so,” said Zayd, “for I have seen from this man 
such things that 1 could never choose another above him.” 

All further talk was cut short by Muhammad, who now bade them come 
with him to the Ka‘bah; and, standing in the Hijr, he said in a loud voice: 
“All ye who are present, bear witness that Zayd is my son; I am his heir and 
he is mine.” 1 

The father and the uncle had thus to return with their purpose un¬ 
achieved. But the tale they had to tell their tribe, of the deep mutual love 
which had brought about this adoption, was not an inglorious one; and 
when they saw that Zayd was free, and established in honour, with what 
promised to be a high standing amongst the people of the Sanctuary such 
as might benefit his brothers and other kinsmen in years to come, they were 
reconciled and went their way without bitterness. From that day the new 
Hashimite was known in Mecca as Zayd ibn Muhammad. 

Among the most frequent visitors to the house was Safiyyah, now 
Khadljah’s sister-in-law, the youngest of Muhammad’s aunts, younger 
even than himself; and with her she would bring her little son Zubayr, 
whom she had named after her elder brother. Zubayr was thus well 
acquainted with his cousins, the daughters of Muhammad, from his 
earliest years. With Safiyyah came also her faithful retainer Salma, who 

1 I.S. III/i, 28. 



The Household 39 

had delivered Khadljah of all her children, and who considered herself to 
be one of the household. 

As the years passed there were occasional visits from HalTmah, Mu¬ 
hammad’s foster-mother, and KhadTjah was always generous to her. One 
of these visits was at a time of severe and widespread drought through 
which Hallmah’s flocks had been seriously depleted, and Khadljah made 
her a gift of forty sheep and a howdah camel. 1 This same drought, which 
produced something like a famine in the Hijaz, was the cause of a very 
important addition to the household. 

Abu Talib had more children than he could easily support, and the 
famine weighed heavily upon him. Muhammad noticed this and felt that 
something should be done. The wealthiest of his uncles was Abu Lahab but 
he was somewhat remote from the rest of the family, partly no doubt 
because he had never had any full brothers or sisters amongst them, being 
the only child of his mother. Muhammad preferred to ask for the help of 
‘Abbas, who could well afford it, being a successful merchant, and who 
was close to him because they had been brought up together. Equally close, 
or even closer, was ‘Abbas’s wife, Umm al-Fadl, who loved him dearly and 
who always made him welcome at their house. So he went to them now, 
and suggested that each of their two households should take charge of one 
of Abu Talib’s sons until his circumstances improved. They readily agreed, 
and the two men went to Abu Talib, who said when he heard their 
proposal: “Do what ye will, but leave me ‘Aqll and Talib.” Ja‘far was now 
about fifteen, and he was no longer the youngest of the family. His mother 
Fatimah had borne yet another son to Abu Talib, some ten years younger, 
and they had named him ‘All. ‘Abbas said he would take charge of Ja‘far, 
whereupon Muhammad agreed to do the same for ‘All. It was about this 
time that Khadljah had borne her last child, a son named ‘Abd Allah, but 
the babe had died at an even earlier age than Qasim. In a sense he was 
replaced by ‘All, who was brought up as a brother to his four girl cousins, 
being about the same age as Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum, somewhat 
younger than Zaynab and somewhat older than Fatimah. These five, 
together with Zayd, formed the immediate family of Muhammad and 
Khadljah. But there were many other relatives for whom he felt a deep 
attachment, and who have a part to play, large or small, in the history 
which here is chronicled. 

Muhammad’s eldest uncle, Harith, who was now dead, had left many 
children, and one of the sons, his cousin Abu Sufyan, was also his 
foster-brother, having been nursed by Hallmah amongst the Bani Sa‘d a 
few years after himself. People would say that Abu Sufyan was of those 
who bore the closest family likeness to Muhammad; and amongst the 
characteristics they had in common was eloquence. But Abu Sufyan was a 
gifted poet - perhaps more gifted than his uncles Zubayr and Abu Talib - 
whereas Muhammad had never shown any inclination to compose a 
poem, though he was unsurpassed in his mastery of Arabic, and in the 
beauty of his speech. 

In Abu Sufyan, who was more or less his own age, he had something of a 
friend and a companion. A little closer by blood kinship were the numer- 

1 I.S. 1/1,71. 



40 Muhammad 

ous children of his father’s full sisters, that is, of ‘Abd al-Muttalib’s five 
eldest daughters. Amongst the eldest of these cousins were the children of 
his aunt Umaymah who had married a man named Jahsh, of the North 
Arabian tribe of Asad. 1 He had a house in Mecca, and it was possible for a 
man who lived amongst a tribe other than his own to become, by mutual 
alliance, the confederate of a member of that tribe, into which he thus 
became partly integrated, sharing up to a point its responsibilities and its 
privileges. Harb, now chief of the Umayyad 2 branch of the clan of ‘Abdu 
Shams, had made Jahsh his confederate, so that by marrying him 
Umaymah could almost be said to have married a Shamsite. Their eldest 
son, named after her brother ‘Abd Allah, was some twelve years younger 
than Muhammad, and the two cousins had a great affection for each other. 
Umaymah’s daughter Zaynab, several years younger than her brother, a 
girl of outstanding beauty, was included in this bond. Muhammad had 
known and loved them both from their earliest childhood; and the same 
was true of others, in particular of Abu Salamah, the son of his aunt 
Barrah. 

The powerful attraction which centred on al-Amln - as he was so often 
called - went far beyond his own family; and Khadijah was with him at 
that centre, loved and honoured by all who came within the wide circle of 
their radiance, a circle which also included many of her own relations. 
Particularly close to her was her sister Halah whose son, Abu l-‘As, was a 
frequent visitor to the house. Khadijah loved this nephew as if he had been 
her own son; and in due course - for she was continually sought after for 
help and advice - Halah asked her to find a wife for him. When Khadijah 
consulted her husband, he suggested their daughter Zaynab, who would 
soon be of marriageable age; and when the time came they were married. 

The hopes of Hashim and Muttalib - the two clans counted politically 
as one — were set upon Muhammad for the recovery of their waning 
influence. But beyond all question of clan, he had come to be considered 
by the chiefs of Quraysh as one of the most capable men of the generation 
which would succeed them and which would have, after them, the task of 
maintaining the honour and the power of the tribe throughout Arabia. The 
praise of al-Amln was continually upon men’s lips; and it was perhaps 
because of this that Abu Lahab now came to his nephew with the proposal 
that Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum should be betrothed to his sons ‘Utbah 
and ‘Utaybah. Muhammad agreed, for he thought well of these two 
cousins, and the betrothals took place. 

It was about this time that Umm Ayman became once more a member of 
the household. It is not recorded whether she returned as a widow, or 
whether her husband had divorced her. But she had no doubt that her place 
was there, and for his part Muhammad would sometimes address her as 
“mother”, and would say of her to others: “She is all that is left me of the 
people of my house.” 3 

' Asad ibn Khuzaymah, a tribe to the north-east of Mecca, whose territory lay at the 
northern extremity of the plain of Najd. It is not to be confused with the Quraysh clan of 
Asad. 

2 Named after Harb’s father Umayyah, son of ‘Abdu Shams. 

2 I.S.VIII, i6i.’ 



XIV 


The Rebuilding of 
the Ka‘bah 

S OMEWHAT before these last-mentioned happenings, about the 
time when ‘All was taken into the household, when Muhammad was 
thirty-five years old, Quraysh decided to rebuild the Ka‘bah. As it 
then stood the walls were just above the height of a man, and there was no 
roof, which meant that even when the door was locked access was easy; 
and recently there had been a theft of some of its treasure which was 
stowed in a vault that had been dug inside the building for that purpose. 
They already had all the wood that was needed for the roof: the ship of a 
Greek merchant had been driven ashore and wrecked beyond repair at 
Jeddah, so they had taken its timbers to serve as rafters; and there 
happened to be in Mecca at that time a Copt who was a skilled carpenter. 

But such was their awe of the Ka‘bah that they hesitated to lay hands on 
it. Their plan was to demolish its walls which were built of loose stones and 
to rebuild it altogether; but they were afraid of incurring the guilt of 
sacrilege, and their hesitation was greatly increased by the appearance of a 
large snake which had taken to coming every day out of the vault to sun 
itself against a wall of the Ka‘bah. If anyone approached, it would rear its 
head and hiss with gaping jaws, and they were terrified of it. But one day, 
while it was sunning itself, God sent against it an eagle, which seized it and 
flew away with it. So Quraysh said among themselves: “Now we may 
indeed hope that God is pleased with our intent. We have a craftsman 
whose heart is with us, and we have wood; and God hath rid us of the 
serpent.” 

The first man to lift a stone from the top of one of the walls was the 
Makhzumite Abu Wahb, the brother of Fatimah, Muhammad’s grand¬ 
mother; but no sooner had it been lifted than the stone leapt from his hand 
and returned to its place, whereupon they all drew back from the Ka‘bah, 
afraid to proceed with the work. Then the chief of Makhzum, Walld the 
son of the now dead Mughlrah, took up a pickaxe and said: “I will begin 
the razing for you”; and going to the Ka‘bah he said: “O God, fear not, O 
God, we intend nought but good.” Thereupon he knocked down part of 
the wall between the Black Stone and the Yemenite Corner, that is, the 
south-easterly wall; but the rest of the people held back. “Let us wait and 
see,” they said. “If he be smitten we will raze no more of it, but restore it 



42 Muhammad 

even as it was; but if he be not smitten, then is God pleased with our work, 
and we will raze it all to the ground.” The night passed without mishap and 
Walld was again at work early next morning, so the others joined him; and 
when the walls were all down as far as the foundation of Abraham they 
came upon large greenish cobble-stones like the humps of camels placed 
side by side. A man put a crowbar between two of these stones to lever one 
of them out; but at the first movement of the stone a quaking shudder ran 
through the whole of Mecca, and they took it as a sign that they must leave 
that foundation undisturbed. 

Inside the Corner of the Black Stone they had found a piece of writing in 
Syriac. They kept it, not knowing what it was, until one of the Jews read it 
to them: “I am God, the Lord of Becca. I created her the day I created the 
heavens and the earth, the day I formed the sun and the moon, and I placed 
round about her seven inviolable angels. She shall stand so long as her two 
hills stand, blessed for her people with milk and water.” Another piece of 
writing was found beneath the Station of Abraham, a small rock near the 
door of the Ka‘bah which bears the miraculous print of his foot: “Mecca is 
the holy house of God. Her sustenance cometh unto her from three 
directions. Let not her people be the first to profane her.” 

Quraysh now gathered more stones, in addition to those they already 
had, so as to increase the height of the building. They worked separately, 
clan by clan, until the walls were high enough for the Black Stone to be 
built once more into its corner. Then a violent disagreement broke out 
amongst them, for each clan wanted the honour of lifting it into its place. 
The deadlock lasted for four or five days and the tension had increased to 
the point of alliances being made and preparations for battle begun, when 
the oldest man present proposed a solution. “O men of Quraysh,” he said, 
“take as arbiter between you, about that wherein ye differ, the first man 
who shall enter in through the gate of this Mosque.” 1 The precinct round 
the Ka‘bah was called a mosque, in Arabic masjid , a place of prostration, 
because the rite of prostrating oneself to God in the direction of the Holy 
House had been performed there since the time of Abraham and Ishmael. 
They agreed to follow the old man’s counsel; and the first man to enter the 
Mosque was Muhammad, who had just returned to Mecca after an 
absence. The sight of him produced an immediate and spontaneous 
recognition that here was the right person for the task, and his arrival was 
greeted by exclamations and murmurs of satisfaction. “It is al-Amln,” said 
some. “We accept his judgement,” said others, “it is Muhammad.” When 
they explained the matter to him, he said: “Bring me a cloak.” And when 
they brought it, he spread it on the ground, and taking up the Black Stone 
he laid it on the middle of the garment. “Let each clan take hold of the 
border of the cloak,” he said. “Then lift it up, all of you together.” And 
when they had raised it to the right height he took the stone and placed it in 
the corner with his own hands; and the building was continued and 
completed above it. 


1 I.I. iz 5 . 



XV 


The First 
Revelations 

I T was not long after this outward sign of his authority and his mission 
that he began to experience powerful inward signs, in addition to those 
of which he had already been conscious. When asked about these he 
spoke of “true visions” which came to him in his sleep and he said that they 
were “like the breaking of the light of dawn.” 1 The immediate result of 
these visions was that solitude became dear to him, and he would go for 
spiritual retreats to a cave in Mount Hira’ not far from the outskirts of 
Mecca. There was nothing in this that would have struck Quraysh as 
particularly strange, for retreat had been a traditional practice amongst the 
descendants of Ishmael, and in each generation there had been one or two 
who would withdraw to a solitary place from time to time so that they 
might have a period that was uncontaminated by the world of men. In 
accordance with this age-old practice, Muhammad would take with him 
provisions and consecrate a certain number of nights to the worship of 
God. Then he would return to his family, and sometimes on his return he 
took more provisions and went again to the mountain. During these few 
years it often happened that after he had left the town and was 
approaching his hermitage he would hear clearly the words “Peace be on 
thee, O Messenger of God”, 2 and he would turn and look for the speaker 
but no one was in sight, and it was as if the words had come from a tree or a 
stone. 

Ramadan was the traditional month of retreat, and it was one night 
towards the end of Ramadan, in his fortieth year, when he was alone in the 
cave, that there came to him an Angel in the form of a man. The Angel said 
to him: “Recite!” and he said: “I am not a reciter,” whereupon, as he 
himself told it, “the Angel took me and whelmed me in his embrace until he 
had reached the limit of mine endurance. Then he released me and said: 
‘Recite!’ I said: ‘I am not a reciter,’ and again he took me and whelmed 
me in his embrace, and again when he had reached the limit of mine en¬ 
durance he released me and said: ‘Recite!’, and again I said ‘I am not a 
reciter.’ Then a third time he whelmed me as before, then released me and 
said: 


' B. I, 3. 


2 U.151. 



44 


Muhammad 


Recite in the name of thy Lord who created! 

He createth man from a clot of blood. 

Recite; and thy Lord is the Most Bountiful, 

He who hath taught by the pen, 
taught man what he knew not .'” 2 

He recited these words after the Angel, who thereupon left him; and he 
said; “It was as though the words were written on my heart.” 3 But he 
feared that this might mean he had become a jinn-inspired poet or a man 
possessed. So he fled from the cave, and when he was half-way down the 
slope of the mountain he heard a voice above him saying: “O Muhammad, 
thou art the Messenger of God, and I am Gabriel.” He raised his eyes 
heavenwards and there was his visitant, still recognisable but now clearly 
an Angel, filling the whole horizon, and again he said: “O Muhammad, 
thou art the Messenger of God, and 1 am Gabriel.” The Prophet stood 
gazing at the Angel; then he turned away from him, but whichever way he 
looked the Angel was always there, astride the horizon, whether it was to 
the north, to the south, to the east or to the west. Finally the Angel turned 
away, and the Prophet descended the slope and went to his house. “Cover 
me! Cover me!” 4 he said to Khadljah as with still quaking heart he laid 
himself on his couch. Alarmed, yet not daring to question him, she quickly 
brought a cloak and spread it over him. But when the intensity of his awe 
had abated he told her what he had seen and heard; and having spoken to 
him words of reassurance she went to tell her cousin Waraqah, who was 
now an old man, and blind. “Holy! Holy!”, he said. “By Him in whose 
hand is the soul of Waraqah, there hath come unto Muhammad the 
greatest Namus, 5 even he that would come unto Moses. Verily Mu¬ 
hammad is the Prophet of this people. Bid him rest assured.” So Khadljah 
went home and repeated these words to the Prophet, who now returned in 
peace of mind to the cave, that he might fulfil the number of days he had 
dedicated to God for his retreat. When this was completed, he went 
straight to the Ka‘bah, according to his wont, and performed the rite of the 
rounds, after which he greeted the old and the blind Waraqah whom he 
had noticed amongst those who were sitting in the Mosque; and Waraqah 
said to him: “Tell me, O son of my brother, what thou hast seen and 
heard.” The Prophet told him, and the old man said again what he had said 
to Khadljah. But this time he added: “Thou wilt be called a liar, and 
ill-treated, and they will cast thee out and make war upon thee; and if 1 live 
to see that day, God knoweth I will help His cause.” 6 Then he leaned 
towards him and kissed his forehead, and the Prophet returned to his 
home. 

The reassurances of Khadljah and Waraqah were followed by a reassur¬ 
ance from Heaven in the form of a second Revelation. The manner of its 
coming is not recorded, but when asked how Revelation came to him the 
Prophet mentioned two ways: “Sometimes it cometh unto me like the 

1 K. XCVI, 1—5. 2 B. 1 ,3. 3 1.1.153. 4 B.1,3. 

5 The Greek Nomos, in the sense of Divine Law or Scripture, here identified with the 
Angel of Revelation. 

6 1 . 1 . 153 - 4 - 



The First Revelations 4 5 


reverberations of a bell, and that is the hardest upon me; the reverberations 
abate when I am aware of their message. And sometimes the Angel taketh 
the form of a man and speaketh unto me, and I am aware of what he 
saith.” 1 

The Revelation, this second time, began with a single letter, the earliest 
instance of those cryptic letters with which several of the Koranic messages 
begin. The letter was followed by a Divine oath, sworn by the pen which 
had already been mentioned in the first Revelation as the primary means of 
God’s teaching men His wisdom. When questioned about the pen, the 
Prophet said: “The first thing God created was the pen. He created the 
tablet and said to the pen: “Write!” And the pen answered: “What shall I 
write?” He said: “Write My knowledge of My creation till the day of 
resurrection.” Then the pen traced what had been ordained.” 2 The oath 
by the pen is followed by a second oath, by that which they writer 
and amongst what they, that is the Angels, write in Heaven with lesser 
pens on lesser tablets is the Koran’s celestial archetype, which subsequent 
Revelations refer to as a glorious recitation (qur’an)•' on an inviolable 
tablet 4 and as the mother of the book. s The two oaths are followed by 
the Divine reassurance: 

Nun. By the pen, and by that which they write, no madman art thou, 
through the grace of thy Lord unto thee, and thine shall be a meed 
unfailing, and verily of an immense magnitude is thy nature* 

After the first Messages had come there was a period of silence, until the 
Prophet began to fear that he had incurred in some way the displeasure of 
Heaven, though Khadljah continually told him that this was not possible. 
Then at last the silence was broken, and there came a further reassurance, 
and with it the first command directly related to his mission: 

By the morning brightness, and by the night when it is still, thy Lord 
hath not forsaken thee nor doth He hate thee, and the last shall be better 
for thee than the first, and thy Lord shall give and give unto thee, and 
thou shalt be satisfied. Hath He not found thee an orphan and sheltered 
thee, and found thee astray and guided thee, and found thee needy and 
enriched thee? So for the orphan, oppress him not, and for the beggar, 
repel him not, and for the bountiful grace of thy Lord, proclaim it ! 7 

’ B.1,3. 2 Tir.44. 

3 It is from this that the Divine Revelation on which Islam is based takes its name. 

4 LXXXV, 21—2. 5 XIII, 39. 6 LXVIII,i- 4 . 7 XCIII. 



XVI 


Worship 


I N accordance with these last two words he now began to speak about 
the Angel and the Revelations to those who, after his wife, were the 
nearest and dearest to him. As yet he had no demands to make upon 
them, except that they should not divulge his secret. But this situation did 
not last long: Gabriel came to him one day on the high ground above 
Mecca, and struck with his heel the turf of the hillside, whereupon a spring 
gushed forth from it. Then he performed the ritual ablution to show the 
Prophet how to purify himself for worship, and the Prophet followed his 
example. Then he showed him the postures and movements of the prayer, 
the standing, the inclining, the prostrating and the sitting, with the 
repeated magnification, that is, the words Allahu Akbar , God is Most 
Great , and the final greeting as-Salamu ‘alaykum , Peace be on you, and 
again the Prophet followed his example. Then the Angel left him, and the 
Prophet returned to his house, and taught Khadljah all that he had learnt, 
and they prayed together. 

The religion was now established on the basis of the ritual purification 
and prayer; and after Khadljah the first to embrace it were ‘All and Zayd 
and the Prophet’s friend Abu Bakr of the clan of Taym. ‘All was only ten 
years old, and Zayd had as yet no influence in Mecca, but Abu Bakr was 
liked and respected, for he was a man of wide knowledge, easy manners 
and an agreeable presence. Many would come to consult him about this or 
that, and he now began to confide in all those whom he felt he could trust, 
urging them to follow the Prophet. Many responses took place through 
him; and two of the earliest to respond to the call were a man of Zuhrah, 
‘Abdu ‘Amr, the son of ‘Awf, a distant kinsman of the Prophet’s mother, 
and Abu ‘Ubaydah the son of al-Jarrah of the Bani 1 -Harith. 1 

In connection with the first of these, ‘Abdu ‘Amr, a precedent of 
importance was established. Amongst the most striking features of the 
Revelation were the two Divine Names ar-Rahman and ar-Rahtm. The 
word rahim , an intensive form of rahim , merciful, was current in the sense 
of very merciful or boundlessly merciful. The still more intensive rahman, 
for lack of any concept to fit it, had fallen into disuse. The Revelation 
revived it in accordance with the new religion’s basic need to dwell on the 
heights of Transcendence. Being stronger even than ar-Rahim (the All- 
Merciful), the Name ar-Rahman refers to the very essence or root of 
Mercy, that is, to the Infinite Beneficence or Goodness of God, and the 


See genealogical tree, p. 347. 



Worship 47 

Koran expressly makes it an equivalent of Allah: Invoke God (Allah) or 
invoke the Infinitely Good (ar-Rahman), whichever ye invoke. His are the 
names most Beautiful This Name of Goodness was very dear to the 
Prophet, and since the name ‘Abdu ‘ Amr, the slave of ‘Amr, was too pagan, 
he changed the new believer’s name to ‘Abd ar-Rahman, the slave of the 
Infinitely Good. Nor was the son of ‘Awf the only man whose name he 
changed to ‘Abd ar-Rahman. 

Some of the earliest responses were promoted initially by motives which 
could not be ascribed to any human attempt to persuade. Abu Bakr had 
long been known throughout Mecca for his ability to interpret dreams; 
and one morning he had an unexpected visit from Khalid, the son of a 
powerful Shamsite, Sa‘id ibn al-‘As, The young man’s face still showed 
signs of having been recently aghast at some terrifying experience; and he 
hastened to explain that during the night he had had a dream which he 
knew must be significant though what it meant he did not understand. 
Could Abu Bakr tell him the meaning of it? He had dreamed that he was 
standing at the edge of a great pit in which was a raging fire so vast that he 
could see no end to it. Then his father came, and tried to push him into it; 
and as they were struggling on the brink, at the moment of his greatest 
terror, he felt round his waist the firm clasp of two hands which held him 
back despite all his father’s efforts. Looking round, he saw that his saviour 
was al-Amin, Muhammad the son of ‘Abd Allah, and at that moment he 
awoke. “I wish thee joy,” said Abu Bakr. “This man who saved thee is the 
Messenger of God, so follow him — nay, follow him thou shalt, and shalt 
enter through him into Islam which shall safeguard thee against falling into 
the fire.” Khalid went straight to the Prophet, and having told him of his 
dream he asked him what his message was, and what he should do. The 
Prophet instructed him, and Khalid entered Islam, keeping it a secret from 
his family. 1 2 

It was about the same time that another man of ‘Abdu Shams, a 
merchant on his way home from Syria, was awoken one night by a voice 
crying in the desert: “Sleepers, awake, for verily Ahmad hath come forth in 
Mecca.” 3 The merchant was ‘Uthman, son of the Umayyad ‘Affan, and 
grandson, through his mother, of one of ‘Abd al-Muttalib’s daughters, 
Umm Hakim al-Bayda’, the Prophet’s aunt. The words sank into his heart, 
though he did not understand what was meant by “coming forth”, nor did 
he recognise that the superlative Ahmad “most glorified” stood for 
Muhammad, “glorified”. But before reaching Mecca he was overtaken by 
a man of Taym named Talhah, a cousin of Abu Bakr; and Talhah had 
passed through Bostra, where he had been asked by a monk if Ahmad had 
yet appeared amongst the people of the Sanctuary. “Who is Ahmad?” said 
Talhah. “The son of ‘Abd al-Muttalib’s son ‘Abd Allah,” answered the 
monk. “This is his month, in which he shall come forth; and he is the last of 
the Prophets.” Talhah repeated these words to ‘Uthman, who told him of 
his own experience, and on their return Talhah suggested that they should 

1 XVII, no. In what follows, the Names of Mercy will sometimes be rendered “the 
Good, the Merciful” for sake of having a single word as in Arabic, and relying on the definite 
article to denote the Absolute. The same practice is also followed with other Divine Names. 

2 LS.IV/i, 68. 3 I.S. III/i, 37. 



48 Muhammad 

go to his cousin Abu Bakr, who was known to be the closest friend of the 
man now uppermost in their minds. So they went to Abu Bakr, and when 
they told him what they had heard he took them at once to the Prophet so 
that they could repeat to him the words of the monk and the words of the 
desert voice. Having done this, they made their professions of faith. 

A fourth conversion, no less remarkable than these in the way it took 
place, was that of ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud, a young confederate of Zuhrah. 
Telling of it himself, he said: “I was at that time a youth just grown into 
manhood, and I was pasturing the flocks of ‘Uqbah ibn Abl Mu‘ayt, when 
one day the Prophet and Abu Bakr passed by. The Prophet asked me if I 
had any milk to give them to drink. I replied that the flocks were not mine 
but entrusted to my care and I could not give them to drink. The Prophet 
said: ‘Hast thou a young ewe that no ram hath ever leaped?’ I said I had, 
and brought her to them. Having tethered her, the Prophet put his hand to 
her udder and prayed, whereupon the udder swelled with milk, and Abu 
Bakr brought a boulder which was hollowed like a cup. The Prophet 
milked her into it, and we all drank. Then he said to the udder: ‘Dry,’ and it 
dried.” 1 A few days later ‘Abd Allah went to the Prophet and entered Islam. 
Nor was it long before he had learned from him seventy surahs 2 3 by heart, 
being exceptionally gifted in that way; and he soon became one of the best 
and most authoritative reciters of the Koran. 

The Prophet had been distressed by the period of silence from Heaven; yet 
his soul still shrank from receiving the tremendous impact of the Divine 
Word, which itself affirmed in a not yet revealed verse: If We sent down 
this Koran upon a mountain, thou wouldst see it prostrate in humility, rent 
asunder through fear of God. 3 The impulse which had prompted him to cry 
out “cover me, cover me” still came to him at times; and one night when he 
was lying wrapped in his cloak there broke in upon his seclusion a Divine 
Command more stern and urgent than any he had yet received, bidding 
him warn men of the Day of Judgement: O thou who art wrapped in thy 
cloak, arise and warn! Thy Lord magnify! Thy raiment purify! Defilement 
shun !. . . For when the trumpet shall be blown, that shall be a day of 
anguish, not of ease, for disbelievers . 4 Another night soon after this, he 
was aroused by further commands telling him of the intensity of wor¬ 
ship expected from him and his followers, and fully confirming his 
apprehensions of a great burden of responsibility that was to be laid upon 
him: O thou who art wrapped in thy raiment, keep vigil all the night save a 
little, half the night or lessen than half a little, or add to it, and with care 
and clarity chant the Koran. Verily We shall load thee with a word of 
heavy weight . 5 In the same passage was also the command: And invoke 
in remembrance the name o f thy Lord, and devote thyself unto Him with 
an utter devotion. Lord of the east and of the west - no god but He. Him 

1 I.S. HI/1,107. 

2 The Koran consists of 114 surahs, of unequal length. The longest surah has 285 verses, 
the shortest only three. 

3 LIX, 21. The sudden change from first to third person We . . . God, is frequent in the 
Koran. 

4 LXXIV, 1-10. 5 LXXIII, 1-5. 



Worship 49 


therefore take, on Him place thy reliance ! 1 There came also other Revela¬ 
tions, more gentle in tone, which confirmed and increased the reassurances 
already given to the Prophet; and on one occasion, visible to him alone, as 
was normally the case, the Angel said to him: “Give unto Khadljah 
greetings of Peace from her Lord.” So he said to her: “O Khadljah, here is 
Gabriel who greeteth thee with Peace from thy Lord.” And when Khadljah 
could find words to speak, she answered; “God is Peace, and from Him is 
Peace, and on Gabriel be Peace!” 1 

The first adherents of the new religion took the commands addressed to 
the Prophet as applying to themselves, so like him they would keep long 
vigils. As to the ritual prayer, they were now careful not only to perform 
the ablution in preparation for it but also to make sure that their garments 
were free from all defilement; and they were quick to learn by heart all that 
had been revealed of the Koran, so that they might chant it as part of their 
worship. The Revelations now began to come more copiously. They were 
immediately transmitted by the Prophet to those who were with him, then 
passed from mouth to mouth, memorised and recited — a long and rapidly 
increasing litany which told of the ephemeral nature of all earthly things, 
of death and of the certainty of the Resurrection and the Last Judgement, 
followed by Hell or Paradise. But above all it told of the Glory of God, of 
His Indivisible Oneness, his Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Bounty 
and Power; and by extension it continually referred to His Signs, the 
marvels of nature, and to their harmonious working together which 
testified so eloquently to the Oneness of their Sole Originator. Harmony is 
the imprint of Oneness upon multiplicity, and the Koran draws attention 
to that harmony as a theme for man’s meditation. 

When uninhibited by the presence of hostile disbelievers, the believers 
greeted each other with the words given to the Prophet by Gabriel as the 
greeting of the people of Paradise, “Peace be on you!”, to which the answer 
is “And on you be Peace!”, the plural being used to include the two 
guardian Angels of the person greeted. The revealed verses of consecration 
and of thanksgiving also played an increasingly significant part in their 
lives and their outlook. The Koran insists on the need for gratitude, and the 
sacrament of thanksgiving is to say Praise be to God the Lord of the 
worlds , whereas that of consecration or dedication is to say In the Name of 
God, the Infinitely Good, the All-Merciful. This was the first verse of every 
surah 3 of the Koran, and following the example of the Prophet they used it 
to inaugurate every Koranic recital, and by extension every other rite, and 
by further extension every act or initiative. The new religion admitted of 
nothing profane. 

1 LXXIII, 8-9. 2 I.H.156. 

3 Only one surah, IX (see p. 32.3) begins without the mention of the Names of Mercy, 
but that had not yet been revealed. 



XVII 


“Warn Thy Family” 


N O summons to Islam had yet been made in public, but there was an 
ever-increasing group of devout believers and intense worship¬ 
pers, both men and women, most of them young. Amongst the 
first to come, apart from those already mentioned, were the Prophet’s 
cousins Ja‘far and Zubayr; then came other cousins, his and theirs, the 
sons of their aunt Umaymah, ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh and his brother ‘Ubayd 
Allah, and the son of their aunt Barrah, Abu Salamah. There were also two 
cousins on his mother’s side, Sa‘d the son of Abu Waqqas of Zuhrah and 
his younger brother ‘Umayr. But not one of the Prophet’s four uncles 
showed any inclination to follow him: Abu Talib made no objection to the 
Islam of his two sons Ja‘far and ‘All, but for himself he said he was not 
prepared to forsake the religion of his forefathers; ‘Abbas was evasive and 
Hamzah uncomprehending, though both assured him of their unfailing 
affection for him personally; but Abu Lahab showed plainly his conviction 
that his nephew was self-deceived, if not a deceiver. 

After the revelation of the verse Warn thy family who are thy nearest of 
kin 1 the Prophet called ‘All to him, and said: “God hath commanded me to 
warn my family, my nearest of kin, and the task is beyond my strength. But 
make ready food, with a leg of mutton, and fill a cup with milk, and 
assemble together the Bani ‘Abd al-Muttalib, that I may tell them that 
which I have been commanded to say.” ‘All did exactly as he had been told, 
neither more nor less, and most of the clan of Hashim came to the meal, 
about forty men. “When they were assembled,” said ‘All, “the Prophet 
told me to bring in the food which I had made ready. Then he took a piece 
of meat, bit upon it, and cast it again into the dish, saying: ‘Take it in the 
Name of God.’ The men ate in relays, several at a time, until not one of 
them could eat any more. But,” said ‘All, “I could see no change in the 
food, except that it had been stirred by men’s hands; and by my life, if they 
had been but one man, he could have eaten all that I had put before them. 
Then the Prophet said: ‘Give them to drink’, so I brought the cup, and each 
drank his fill, though one man alone could have emptied that cup. But 
when the Prophet was about to address them, Abu Lahab forestalled him 
and said: ‘Your host hath placed a spell upon you’ whereat they dispersed 
before he could speak.” 

The next day the Prophet told ‘All to do exactly as he had done the 
previous day. So another similar meal was prepared and everything went 
as before, except that this time the Prophet was on his guard and made sure 


1 XXVI, 214. 



“'Warn Thy Family ” 51 


of addressing them. “O sons of ‘Abd al-Muttalib,” he said, “I know of no 
Arab who hath come to his people with a nobler message than mine. I bring 
you the best of this world and the next. God hath commanded me to call 
you unto Him. Which of you, then, will help me in this, and be my brother, 
mine executor and my successor amongst you?” There was silence 
throughout the clan. Ja‘far and Zayd could both have spoken, but they 
knew that their Islam was not in question and that the purpose of the 
gathering was to bring in others than themselves. But when the silence 
remained unbroken, the thirteen-year-old ‘All felt impelled to speak, and 
said: “O Prophet of God, I will be thy helper in this.” The Prophet laid his 
hand on the back of ‘All’s neck and said: “This is my brother, mine 
executor and my successor amongst you. Hearken unto him, and obey 
him.” The men rose to their feet, laughing and saying to Abu Talib: “He 
hath ordered thee to hearken unto thy son and to obey him.” 1 

As to the Prophet’s aunts, Safiyyah had no hesitation in following him as 
her son Zubayr had done, but her five sisters could not bring themselves to 
make any decision. Arwa’s attitude was typical of them all: “I am waiting 
to see what my sisters will do,” she would say. On the other hand, his aunt 
by marriage, Umm al-Fadl, the wife of the hesitant ‘Abbas, was the first 
woman to enter Islam after Khadljah; and she was soon able to bring three 
of her sisters to the Prophet - Maymunah, her full sister, and two 
half-sisters, Salma and Asma’. It was in the household of Umm al-Fadl 
that Ja‘far had been brought up, and it was there that he had come to know 
and to love Asma’, whom he had recently married; and Hamzah had 
married her sister Salma. Another of the first to respond was Umm Ayman. 
The Prophet said of her: “He that would marry a woman of the people of 
Paradise, let him marry Umm Ayman” 2 and this remark was overheard by 
Zayd, who took it deeply to heart. She was much older than he was, but 
that did not deter him, and he spoke his mind to the Prophet, who had no 
difficulty in persuading Umm Ayman to agree to the marriage. She bore 
Zayd a son whom they named Usamah, and he was brought up as the 
grandson of the Prophet, who dearly loved him. 

1 Tab. 1171. 2 I.S. VIII, i 6 z. 



XVIII 


Quraysh Take 
Action 

I N these early days of Islam the Companions of the Prophet would often 
go out together in groups to the glens outside Mecca where they could 
pray the ritual prayer together without being seen. But one day a 
number of idolaters came upon them while they were praying and rudely 
interrupted them with ridicule. Finally they came to blows, and Sa’d of 
Zuhrah struck one of the disbelievers with the jawbone of a camel and 
wounded him. This was the first blood shed in Islam. But after that they 
decided to refrain from violence until God should decide otherwise, for the 
Revelation continually enjoined patience upon the Prophet and therefore 
upon them. Bear with patience what they say, and part from them with a 
courteous farewell , 1 and also Deal gently with the disbelievers, give them 
respite for a while . 1 

This case of violence had been something of an exception on both sides, 
for Quraysh as a whole were disposed to tolerate the new religion, even 
after the Prophet had openly proclaimed it, until they saw that it was 
directed against their gods, their principles and their inveterate practices. 
Once they had realised this, however, some of their leading men went in a 
body to Abu Talib, to insist that he should restrain his nephew’s activities. 
He put them off with a conciliatory answer; but when they saw that he had 
done nothing they came to him again and said: “O Abu Talib, thine is a 
high and honourable position amongst us, and we have asked thee to hold 
in check thy brother’s son, but thou hast not done so. By God, we will not 
suffer our fathers to be insulted, our ways scoffed at, and our gods reviled. 
Either make him desist, or we will fight you both.” Then they left him, and 
in great distress he sent for his nephew, and having told him what they had 
threatened, he said: “O son of my brother, spare me and spare thyself. Lay 
not upon me a burden greater than I can bear.” But the Prophet answered 
him saying: “I swear by God, if they put the sun in my right hand and the 
moon in my left on condition that I abandon this course before He hath 
made it victorious, or I have perished therein, I would not abandon it.” 3 
Then, with tears in his eyes, he rose to his feet and turned to go, but his 
uncle called him back: “Son of my brother,” he said, “go thou and say 
what thou wilt, for by God I will never forsake thee on any account.” 

1 LXX 11 I, io. 2 LXXVI, 17. J 1 . 1 .168. 



Quraysh Take Action 5 3 

When they found that their words had achieved nothing with Abu Talib, 
Quraysh still hesitated to attack his nephew directly, for, as a chief of clan, 
Abu Talib had power to grant inviolate protection, and it was in the 
interests of every other chief of clan in Mecca to see that the rights of 
chieftaincy were duly respected. So they confined themselves for the 
moment to organising a widespread persecution of all those adherents of 
the new religion who had no one to protect them. 

Meantime they consulted together in an attempt to form a common 
policy about the cause of their trouble. The situation was exceedingly 
grave: the time of the Pilgrimage would soon be upon them and Arabs 
would come to Mecca from all over Arabia. They, Quraysh, had a high 
reputation for hospitality, not only as regards food and drink but also 
because they made every man welcome, both him and his gods. But this 
year pilgrims would hear their gods insulted by Muhammad and his 
followers, and they would be urged to forsake the religion of their 
forefathers and to adopt a new religion which appeared to have numerous 
disadvantages. No doubt many of them would not come to Mecca again, 
which would not only be bad for trade but would also diminish the honour 
in which the guardians of the Sanctuary were now held. At the worst, the 
Arabs might league together to drive them out of Mecca and to establish 
another tribe or group of tribes in their place - as they themselves had 
previously done with Khuza‘ah, and as Khuza‘ah had done with Jurhum. It 
was therefore imperative that the visiting Arabs should be told that 
Muhammad in no way represented Quraysh. But although it was easy to 
deny his prophethood, that was merely to express an opinion and indirect¬ 
ly to invite others to listen to his claims and judge for themselves. 
Something else needed to be said in addition; and here lay their weakness, 
for some had taken to saying that he was a soothsayer, others that he was 
possessed, others that he was a poet, yet others that he was a sorcerer. They 
consulted Walld the son of Mughlrah, probably the most influential man 
of the tribe at that time, as to which of these accusations would be best 
likely to convince, and he rejected them all as wide of the mark; but on 
second thoughts he decided that although the man in question was 
certainly not a sorcerer, he had at least one thing in common with 
sorcerers: he had the power to separate a man from his father or from his 
brother or from his wife or from his family in general. He advised them 
therefore to let their unanimous accusation be along those lines, namely 
that Muhammad was a dangerous sorcerer, to be avoided at all costs. 
Having readily agreed to follow his advice, they decided that outside the 
town all the roads by which Mecca was approached must be manned, and 
that visitors must be warned in advance to be on their guard against 
Muhammad, for they knew from their own experience how winning he 
could be. Had he not been, before he began preaching, one of the best loved 
men in Mecca? Nor had his tongue lost any of its eloquence, nor his 
presence anything of its compelling majesty. 

They carried out their plans with zeal and thoroughness. In at least one 
particular case, however, they were doomed to failure from the outset. A 
man of the Bani Ghifar named Abu Dharr - his tribe lived to the 
north-west of Mecca, not far from the Red Sea - had already heard of the 



54 Muhammad 

Prophet and of the opposition to him. Like most of his tribesmen, Abu 
Dharr was a highwayman; but unlike them he was a firm believer in the 
Oneness of God, and he refused to pay any respect to idols. His brother 
Unays went to Mecca for some reason, and on his return he told Abu Dharr 
that there was a man of Quraysh who claimed to be a Prophet and who 
said there is no god but God , and his people had disowned him in 
consequence. Abu Dharr immediately set off for Mecca, in the certainty 
that here was a true Prophet, and on his arrival those of the Quraysh who 
manned the approaches told him all he wished to know before he had time 
to ask. Without difficulty he found his way to the Prophet’s house. The 
Prophet was lying asleep on a bench in the courtyard, with his face covered 
by a fold of his cloak. Abu Dharr woke him and wished him good morning. 
“On thee be Peace!” said the Prophet. “Declaim unto me thine utter¬ 
ances,” said the Bedouin. “I am no poet,” said the Prophet, “but what I 
utter is the Koran, and it is not I who speak but God who speaketh.” 
“Recite for me,” said Abu Dharr, and he recited to him a surah , where¬ 
upon Abu Dharr said: “I testify that there is no god but God, and that 
Muhammad is the messenger of God.” “Who are thy people?” said the 
Prophet, and at the man’s answer he looked him up and down in 
amazement and said: “Verily God guideth whom He will.” 1 It was well 
known that the Bani Ghifar were mostly robbers. Having instructed him in 
Islam the Prophet told him to return to his people and await his orders. So 
he returned to the Bani Ghifar, many of whom entered Islam through him. 
Meantime he continued his calling as highwayman, with special attention 
to the caravans of Quraysh. But when he had despoiled a caravan he would 
offer to give back what he had taken on condition that they would testify to 
the Oneness of God and the prophethood of Muhammad. 

Another encounter with the Prophet had the result of bringing Islam to 
the Bani Daws, who were also, like Ghifar, an outlying western tribe. 
Tufayl, a man of Daws, told afterwards how he had been warned on his 
arrival in Mecca against speaking to the sorcerer Muhammad or even 
listening to him lest he should find himself separated from his people. 
Tufayl was a poet and a man of considerable standing in his tribe. Quraysh 
were therefore especially insistent in their warning, and they made him so 
afraid of being bewitched that before going into the Mosque he stuffed his 
ears with cotton wool. The Prophet was there, having just taken up his 
stance for prayer between the Yemeni Corner and the Black Stone as was 
his wont, facing towards Jerusalem, with the south-east wall of the Ka‘bah 
immediately in front of him. His recitation of Koranic verses was not very 
loud, but some of it none the less penetrated Tufayl’s ears. “God would not 
have it”, he said, “but that He should make me hear something of what 
was recited, and I heard beautiful words. So I said to myself: I am a man of 
insight, a poet, and not ignorant of the difference between the fair and the 
foul. Why then should I not hear what this man is saying? If it be fair I will 
accept it, and if foul, reject it. I stayed until the Prophet went away, 
whereupon I followed him and when he entered his house I entered it upon 
his heels and said: ‘O Muhammad thy people told me this and that and 


I.S. IV, 164. 



Quraysh Take Action 5 5 

they so frightened me about thy state that I stuffed mine ears lest I should 
hear thy speech. But God would not have it but that He should make me 
hear thee. So tell me thou the truth of what thou art.”’ 

The Prophet explained Islam to him and recited the Koran, and Tufayl 
made his profession of faith. Then he returned to his people, determined to 
convert them. His father and his wife followed him into Islam, but the rest 
of Daws held back, and he returned to Mecca in great disappointment and 
anger, demanding that the Prophet should put a curse on them. But instead 
the Prophet prayed for their guidance and said to Tufayl: “Return to thy 
people, call them to Islam, and deal gently with them.” 1 These instructions 
he faithfully followed, and as the years passed more and more families of 
Daws were converted. 

Before meeting the Prophet, Tufayl had only met his enemies; but other 
pilgrims met also his followers who told them a story very different from 
what the enemies told them, and each believed what his nature prompted 
him to believe. As a result the new religion was spoken of, well or ill, 
throughout all Arabia; but nowhere was it more a theme of talk than in the 
oasis of Yathrib. 

1 U.isx- 4 - 



XIX 


Aws and Khazraj 


T HE tribes of Aws and Khazraj had alliances with some of the Jewish 
tribes who lived beside them in Yathrib. But relations between them 
were often strained and fraught with ill feeling, not least because the 
monotheistic Jews, conscious of being God’s chosen people, despised the 
polytheistic Arabs, while having to pay them a certain respect because of 
their greater strength. In moments of acrimony and frustration, the Jews 
had been known to say: “The time of a Prophet who is to be sent is now at 
hand, with him we shall slay you, even as ‘Ad and ‘lram 1 were slain.” And 
their rabbis and soothsayers, when asked whence the Prophet would come, 
had always pointed in the direction of the Yemen which was also, for them, 
the direction of Mecca. So when the Yathrib Arabs heard that a man in 
Mecca had now in fact declared himself to be a Prophet, they opened their 
ears; and they were still more interested when they were told something 
about his message, for they were already familiar with many of the 
principles of orthodox religion. In more friendly moments, the Jews often 
spoke to them of the Oneness of God, and of man’s final ends, and they 
would discuss these questions together. The idea that they would rise from 
the dead was especially difficult for the polytheists to accept; and noticing 
this, one of the rabbis pointed to the south and said that thence a Prophet 
was about to come who would affirm the truth of the Resurrection. 

But their deepest preparation for the news from Mecca had come, 
indirectly, from a Jew named lbn al-Hayyaban who had migrated from 
Syria, and who on more than one occasion had saved the oasis from 
drought through his prayers for rain. This saintly man had died about the 
time that the Prophet had received his first Revelation; and when he had 
felt himself at the point of death - as Aws and Khazraj were subsequently 
told - he had said to those about him: “O Jews, what was it, think ye, that 
made me leave a land of bread and wine for a land of hardship and 
hunger?” “Thou best knowest,” they said. “I came to this country,” he 
answered, “in expectation of the coming forth of a Prophet whose time is 
near. To this country he will migrate. I had hopes that he would be sent in 
time for me to follow him. His hour is close upon you.” 2 These words were 
taken greatly to heart by some Jewish youths who heard them and who 
were enabled by them, when the time came, to accept the Prophet even 
though he was not a Jew. 

1 Ancient Arab tribes, suddenly destroyed for their refusal to obey the Prophets who 
were sent to them. 

2 I.1.136. 



Aws and Khazraj 57 

But generally speaking, whereas the Arabs were in favour of the man but 
against the message, the Jews were in favour of the message but against the 
man. For how could God send a Prophet who was not one of the chosen 
people? None the less, when the pilgrims brought news of the Prophet to 
Yathrib, the Jews were interested despite themselves and eagerly ques¬ 
tioned them for more details; and when the Arabs of the oasis sensed this 
eagerness, and when they saw how the monotheistic nature of the message 
increased the interest of the rabbis tenfold, they could not fail to be 
impressed, as were the bearers of the tidings themselves. 

Apart from such considerations, the tribe of Khazraj was fully aware of 
its strong links of kinship with the very man who now claimed to be a 
Prophet, and who had visited Yathrib with his mother as a child, and since 
then, more than once, on his way to Syria. As to Aws, one of their leading 
men, Abu Qays, had married a Meccan who was the aunt of Waraqah and 
also of KhadTjah. Abu Qays had often stayed with his wife’s family, and he 
respected Waraqah’s opinion of the new Prophet. 

All these factors, supplemented by continuous reports of pilgrims and 
other visitors from Mecca, now began to work upon the people of the 
oasis. But for the moment most of their attention was centred upon the 
urgent problems of their own internal affairs. A quarrel ending in blood¬ 
shed between an Awsite and a Khazrajite had gradually involved more and 
more clans of the two tribes. Even the Jews had taken sides. Three battles 
had already been fought, but instead of being decisive these had inflamed 
the souls of men still further, and multiplied the needs for revenge. A fourth 
battle on a larger scale than the others seemed inevitable; and it was in view 
of this that the leaders of Aws had the idea of sending a delegation to 
Mecca to ask Quraysh for their help against Khazraj. 

While they were waiting for an answer, the Prophet went to them and 
asked them if they would like something better than what they had come 
for. They asked what that might be, and he told them of his mission and of 
the religion he had been commanded to preach. Then he recited to them 
some of the Koran, and when he had finished a young man named Iyas, son 
of Mu‘adh, exclaimed: “People, by God this is better than that ye came 
for!” But the leader of the delegation took a handful of earth and threw it 
in the youth’s face, saying: “Let that be all from thee! By my life, we have 
come for other than this.” Iyas relapsed into silence, and the Prophet left 
them. Quraysh refused their request for help, and they returned to Medina. 
Shortly after this Iyas died, and those who were present at his death said 
that they heard him continually testifying to the Oneness of God and 
magnifying, praising and glorifying Him until the end. He is thus counted 
as the first man of Yathrib to enter Islam. 



XX 


Abu Jahl and 
Hamzah 

I N Mecca the steady increase in the number of believers brought with it 
a corresponding increase in the hostility of the disbelievers; and one 
day when some of the chief men of Quraysh were gathered together in 
the Hijr, bitterly stirring up each others’ anger against the Prophet, it so 
happened that the Prophet himself entered the Sanctuary. Going to the east 
corner of the Ka‘bah, he kissed the Black Stone and began to make the 
seven rounds. As he passed the Hijr they raised their voices in slanderous 
calumny against him, and it was clear from his face that he had heard what. 
they said. He passed them again on his second round, and again they 
slandered him. But when they did the same as he was passing them the 
third time he stopped and said: ‘O Quraysh, will ye hear me? Verily by 
Him who holdeth my soul in His Hand, I bring you slaughter!” 1 This word 
and the way he said it seemed to bind them as by a spell. Not one of them 
moved or spoke, until the silence was finally broken by one of those who 
had been most violent, saying in all gentleness: ‘Go thy way, O Abu 
1 -Qasim, for by God thou art not an ignorant fool.” But the respite did not 
last long, for they soon began to blame themselves for having been so 
unaccountably overawed, and they vowed that in the future they would 
make amends for this momentary weakness. 

One of the worst enemies of Islam was a man of Makhzum named ‘ Amr 
and known to his family and friends as Abu 1 -Hakam, which the Muslims 
were not slow to change into Abu Jahl, “the father of ignorance”. He was a 
grandson of Mughlrah and nephew of the now elderly Walld who was 
chief of the clan. Abu Jahl felt sure of succeeding his uncle, and he had 
already established for himself a certain position in Mecca through his 
wealth and his ostentatious hospitality, and partly also through making 
himself feared on account of his ruthlessness and his readiness to take 
revenge on anyone who opposed him. He had been the most indefatigable 
of all those men who had manned the approaches to Mecca during the 
recent Pilgrimage, and the most vociferous in his denunciation of the 
Prophet as a dangerous sorcerer. He was also the most active in persecut¬ 
ing the more helpless believers of his own clan, and in urging other clans to 


I.1.183. 



Abu Jahl and Hamzah 59 

do the same. But one day, despite himself, he indirectly did the new religion 
a great service. 

The Prophet was sitting outside the Mosque near the Safa Gate, so 
named because the pilgrims go out through it to perform the rite of passing 
seven times between the hill of Safa which is near the gate and the hill of 
Marwah some 450 yards to the north. A rock near the foot of Safa marks 
the starting point of the ancient rite, and the Prophet was alone at this 
hallowed place when Abu Jahl came past. Here was an opportunity for the 
Makhzumite to show that he at least was not overawed; and standing in 
front of the Prophet he proceeded to revile him with all the abuse he could 
muster. The Prophet merely looked at him, but spoke no word; and finally, 
having heaped upon him the worst insults he could think of, Abu Jahl 
entered the Mosque to join those of Quraysh who were assembled in the 
Hijr. The Prophet sadly rose to his feet and returned to his home. 

Scarcely had he gone than Hamzah came in sight from the opposite 
direction on his way from the chase, with his bow slung over his shoulder. 
It was his custom, whenever he came back from hunting, to do honour to 
the Holy House before he joined his family. Seeing him approach, a 
woman came out of her house near the Safa Gate and addressed him. She 
was a freedwoman of the household of the now dead ‘ Abd Allah ibn Jud‘an 
of Taym, the man who twenty years previously had been one of the chief 
inaugurators of the chivalric pact, Hilf al-Fudul. The Jud‘an family were 
cousins of Abu Bakr, and she herself, being well disposed to the Prophet 
and his religion, had been outraged by Abu Jahl’s insults, every word of 
which she had overheard. “Abu TJmarah,” 1 she said to Hamzah, “if only 
thou hadst seen how Muhammad, thy brother’s son, was treated even now 
by Abu 1 -Hakam, the son of Hisham. He found him sitting here, and most 
odiously reviled him and abused him. Then he left him” - she pointed 
towards the Mosque to indicate where he had gone - “and Muhammad 
answered not a word.” Hamzah was of a friendly nature and an easy 
disposition. He was none the less the most stalwart man of Quraysh, and 
when roused he was the most formidable and the most unyielding. His 
mighty frame now shook with anger such as he had never felt, and his 
anger set free something in his soul, and brought to completion an already 
half formed resolve. Striding into the Mosque he made straight for Abu 
Jahl; and, standing over him, he raised his bow and brought it down with 
all his force on his back. “Wilt thou insult him,” he said “now that I am of 
his religion, and now that I avouch what he avoucheth? Strike me blow for 
blow, if thou canst.” Abu Jahl was not lacking in courage, but on this 
occasion he evidently felt that it was better that the incident should be 
closed. So when some of the Makhzumites present rose to their feet as if to 
help him he motioned them to be seated, saying: “Let Abu ‘Umarah be, for 
by God I reviled his brother’s son with a right ugly reviling.” 

1 ‘Umarah was Hamzah’s daughter. The politest form of address among the Arabs is to 
name a man “Father (Abu) of so-and-so” and a woman “Mother (Umm) of so-and-so”. 



XXI 


Quraysb Make 
Offers and 
Demands 

F ROM that day Hamzah faithfully maintained his Islam and fol¬ 
lowed all the Prophet’s behests. Nor did his conversion fail to have its 
effect upon Quraysh, who were now more hesitant to harass the 
Prophet directly, knowing that Hamzah would protect him. On the other 
hand, this totally unexpected event made them all the more conscious of 
what they considered to be the gravity of the situation; and it increased 
their sense of the need to find a solution and to stop a movement which, so 
it seemed to them, could only end in the ruin of their high standing among 
the Arabs. In view of this danger they agreed to change their tactics and to 
follow a suggestion which was now made in the assembly by one of the 
leading men of ‘Abdu Shams, ‘Utbah ibn RabT‘ah. “Why should I not go to 
Muhammad,” he said, “and make certain offers to him, some of which he 
might accept? And what he accepteth, that will we give him, on condition 
that he leave us in peace.” Word now came that the Prophet was sitting 
alone beside the Ka‘bah, so ‘Utbah left the assembly forthwith and went to 
the Mosque. He had proposed himself for this task partly because he was a 
grandson of ‘Abdu Shams, the brother of Hashim; and though the clans 
named after these two sons of ‘Abdu Manaf, son of the great Qusayy, had 
drifted apart, their differences could easily be sunk in virtue of their 
common ancestor. Moreover, ‘Utbah was of a less violent and more 
conciliatory nature than most of Quraysh; and he was also more intelli¬ 
gent. 

“Son of my brother,” he said to the Prophet, “thou art as thou knowest a 
noble of the tribe and thy lineage assureth thee of a place of honour. And 
now thou hast brought to thy people a matter of grave concern, whereby 
thou hast rifted their community, declared their way of life to be foolish, 
spoken shamefully of their gods and their religion, and called their 
forefathers infidels. So hear what I propose, and see if any of it be 
acceptable to thee. If it be wealth thou seekest, we will put together a 
fortune for thee from our various properties that thou mayst be the richest 
man amongst us. If it be honour thou seekest, we will make thee our 
overlord and take no decision without thy consent; and if thou wouldst 
have kingship, we will make thee our king; and if thyself thou canst not rid 



Quraysh Make Offers and Demands 6 1 

thee of this sprite that appeareth unto thee, we will find thee a physician 
and spend our wealth until thy cure be complete.” When he had finished 
speaking, the Prophet said to him: “Now hear thou me, O Father of 
Walld.” “I will,” said ‘Utbah, whereupon the Prophet recited to him part 
of a Revelation which he had recently received. 

‘Utbah was prepared to make at least a semblance of heeding, out of 
policy towards a man he hoped to win, but after a few sentences all such 
thoughts had changed to wonderment at the words themselves. He sat 
there with his hands behind his back, leaning upon them as he listened, 
amazed at the beauty of the language that flowed into his ears. The signs 1 
that were recited spoke of the Revelation itself, and of the creation of the 
earth and the firmament. Then it told of the Prophets and of the peoples of 
old who, having resisted them, had been destroyed and doomed to Hell. 
Then came a passage which spoke of the believers, promising them the 
protection of the Angels in this life and the satisfaction of every desire in 
the Hereafter, The Prophet ended his recitation with the words: And of His 
signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon. Bow not down in 
adoration unto the sun nor unto the moon, but bow down in adoration 
unto God their Creator, if Him indeed ye worship 1 —whereupon he placed 
his forehead on the ground in prostration. Then he said: “Thou hast heard 
what thou hast heard, O Abu 1 -Walid, and all is now between thee and 
that.” 

When ‘Utbah returned to his companions they were so struck by the 
change of expression on his face that they exclaimed: “What hath befallen 
thee, O Abu 1 -Walld?” He answered them saying: “I have heard an 
utterance the like of which I have never yet heard. It is not poetry, by God, 
neither is it sorcery nor soothsaying. Men of Quraysh, hearken unto me, 
and do as I say. Come not between this man and what he is about, but let 
him be, for by God the words that I have heard from him will be received as 
great tidings. If the Arabs strike him down ye will be rid of him at the hands 
of others, and if he overcome the Arabs, then his sovereignty will be your 
sovereignty and his might will be your might, and ye will be the most 
fortunate of men.” But they mocked at him saying: “He hath bewitched 
thee with his tongue.” “I have given you my opinion,” he answered, “so do 
what ye think is best.” He opposed them no further, nor was the impact 
made on him by the Koranic verses more than a fleeting impression. 
Meantime, since he had not brought back an answer to any of the 
questions he had put, one of the others said: “Let us send for Muhammad 
and talk to him and argue with him, so that we cannot be blamed for 
having left any way unattempted.” So they sent for him saying: “The 
nobles of thy people are gathered together that they may speak with thee,” 
and he went to them with all speed, thinking that they must have been 
prevailed upon to change their attitude. He longed to guide them to the 
truth, but his hopes faded as soon as they began repeating the offers 
already made to him. When they had finished he said to them: “I am not 
possessed, neither seek I honour amongst you, nor kingship over you. But 

1 Each verse of the Koran is called a ‘sign’ that is, a miracle, in view of its direct 
revelation. 

2 XU, 37. 



6 z Muhammad 


God hath sent me to you as a messenger and revealed to me a book and 
commanded me that 1 should be for you a teller of good tidings and a 
warner. Even so have I conveyed to you the message of my Lord, and I have 
given you good counsel. If ye accept from me what I have brought you, that 
is your good fortune in this world and the next; but if ye reject what I have 
brought, then will I patiently await God’s judgement between us.” 1 

Their only reply was to go back to where they had left off, and to say that 
if he would not accept their offers, then let him do something which would 
prove to them that he was a messenger from God, and which would at the 
same time make life easier for them. “Ask thy Lord.to remove from us these 
mountains which hem us round and to flatten for us our land and to make 
rivers flow through it even as the rivers of Syria and Iraq; and to raise for us 
some of our forefathers, Qusayy amongst them, that we may ask them if 
what thou sayest be true or false. Or if thou wilt not do these things for us, 
then ask favours for thyself. Ask God to send with thee an Angel who shall 
confirm thy words and give us the lie. And ask Him to bestow on thee 
gardens and palaces and treasures of gold and silver, that we may know 
how well thou standest with thy Lord.” The Prophet answered them, 
saying: “I am not one to ask of his Lord the like of such things, nor was I 
sent for that, but God hath sent me to warn and give good tidings.” 
Refusing to listen, they said: “Then make fall the sky in pieces on our 
heads,” in scornful reference to the already revealed verse: If We will, We 
shall make the earth gape and swallow them, or make fall the firmament in 
pieces upon them . 1 “That is for God to decide,” he said. “If He will, He 
will do it.” 

Without answering, except by mutual glances of derision, they went to 
another point. For them, one of the most puzzling features of the Revela¬ 
tion was the constant recurrence of the strange name Rahman , 3 apparently 
related to the source of the Prophet’s inspiration. One of the Revelations 
began with the words The Infinitely Good (ar-Rahman) taught the Koran, 4 
and because it pleased them to accept the rumour that Muhammad was 
taught his utterances by a man in Yamamah, their final retort on this 
occasion was to say: “We have heard that all this is taught thee by a man in 
Yamamah called Rahman, and in Rahman will we never believe!” The 
Prophet remained silent, and they continued: “We have now justified 
ourselves before thee, Muhammad; and we swear by God that we will not 
leave thee in peace nor desist from our present treatment of thee until we 
destroy thee or until thou destroy us.” And one of them added: “We will 
not believe in thee until thou bring us God and the Angels as a warrant.” At 
these words the Prophet rose to his feet, and as he was about to leave them 
‘Abd Allah, the son of Abu Umayyah of Makhzum, also rose and said to 
him: “I will not believe in thee ever, nay, not until thou takest a ladder and I 
see thee mount on it up to heaven, and until thou bringest four Angels to 
testify that thou art what thou claimest to be; and even then I think I would 
not believe thee.” Now this ‘Abd Allah, on his father’s side, was first cousin 
to Abu Jahl; but his mother was ‘Atikah, daughter of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, 
and she had named her son after her brother, the Prophet’s father. So the 

1 1 . 1 .188. 2 XXXIV, 9. 3 See above, pp. 46-9. 4 LV, 1. 



Quraysh Make Offers and Demands 63 

Prophet went home with the sadness at hearing such words from so near a 
kinsman added to his general sorrow at the great distance which now lay 
between himself and the leaders of his people. 

Yet from the clan of Makhzum, where so much hatred seemed to be 
concentrated, he had at least the devotion of Abu Salamah, the son of his 
aunt Barrah; and now from that direction there came an unexpected help 
and strength for the new religion. Abu Salamah had a rich cousin on his 
father’s side named Arqam — their Makhzumite grandfathers were 
brothers - and Arqam came to the Prophet and pronounced the two 
testifications la ilaha ilia Llah , there is no god but God, and Muhammadun 
rasulu Llah , Muhammad is the Messenger of God. Then he placed his 
large house near the foot of Mount Safa at the service of Islam. From 
henceforth the believers had a refuge in the very centre of Mecca where 
they could meet and pray together without fear of being seen or disturbed. 



XXII 


Leaders of Quraysb 


T HE followers of the Prophet were continually increasing, but 
whenever a new convert came to him and pledged his or her 
allegiance, it was more often than not a slave, or a freed slave, or 
a member of Quraysh of the Outskirts or else a young man or woman 
from Quraysh of the Hollow, of influential family but of no influence 
in themselves, whose conversion would increase tenfold the hostility 
of their parents and elder kinsmen. ‘Abd ar-Rahman, Hamzah and 
Arqam had been exceptions, but they were far from being leaders; and 
the Prophet longed to win over some of the chiefs, not one of whom, not 
even his uncle Abu Talib, had shown any inclination to join him. It would 
greatly help him to spread his message if he had the support of a man like 
Abu Jahl’s uncle, Walld, who was not only chief of Makhzum but also, if it 
were possible to say such a thing, the unofficial leader of Quraysh. He was, 
moreover, a man who seemed more open to argument than many of the 
others; and one day an opportunity came for the Prophet to speak with 
Walld alone. But when they were deep in converse a blind man came past, 
one who had recently entered Islam, and hearing the Prophet’s voice he 
begged him to recite to him some of the Koran. When asked to be patient 
and wait for a better moment, the blind man became so importunate that 
in the end the Prophet frowned and turned away. His conversation had 
been ruined; but the interruption was not the cause of any loss, for Walld 
was in fact no more open to the message than those whose case seemed 
hopeless. 

A new surah was revealed almost immediately, and it began with the 
words: He frowned and turned away, because the blind man came to him . 
The Revelation continued: As to him who sufficeth unto himself, with him 
thou art engrossed, yet is it no concern of thine if purified he be not. But as 
for him who cometh unto thee in eager earnestness and in fear of God, 
from him thou art drawn away} 

Not long after this, Walld was to betray his own self-satisfaction by 
saying: “Are revelations sent to Muhammad and not to me, when I am the 
chief man of Quraysh and their lord? Are they sent neither to me nor to 
Abu Mas‘ud, the lord of Thaqlf, when we are the two great men of the two 
townships?” 2 The reaction of Abu Jahl was less coldly confident and more 
passionate. The possibility that Muhammad might be a Prophet was too 
intolerable to be entertained for one moment. “We and the sons of ‘Abdu 


1 LXXX, 5-10. 


2 I.I.138; see K.XLIII. 



Leaders of Quraysh 6 5 

Manaf,” he said, “have vied for honour, the one with the other. They have 
fed food, and we have fed food. They have borne others’ burdens, and we 
have borne others’ burdens. They have given, and we have given, until, 
when we were running equal, knee unto knee, like two mares in a race, they 
say: ‘One of our men is a Prophet; Revelations come to him from Heaven!’ 
And when shall we attain to the like of this? By God, we will never believe 
in him, never admit him to be a speaker of truth.” As to the Shamsite 
‘Utbah, his reaction was less negative, but almost equally lacking in sense 
of proportion; for his first thought was not that Muhammad must be 
followed if he were a Prophet but that his prophethood would bring 
honour to the sons of ‘Abdu Manaf. So one day, when Abu Jahl pointed 
derisively at the object of his hatred and said to ‘Utbah: “There is your 
prophet, O sons of ‘Abdu Manaf,” ‘Utbah rejoined sharply: “And why 
shouldst thou take it amiss if we have a prophet, or a king?” This last word 
was a reference to Qusayy, and a subtle reminder to the Makhzumite that 
‘Abdu Manaf was Qusayy’s son, whereas Makhzum was only his cousin. 
The Prophet was near enough to hear this altercation and he came to them 
and said: “O ‘Utbah, thou wast not vexed for the sake of God, nor for the 
sake of His messenger, but for thine own sake. And as for thee, Abu Jahl, a 
calamity shall come upon thee. Little shalt thou laugh, and much shalt 
thou weep.” 1 

The fortunes of the various clans of Quraysh were continually fluctuat¬ 
ing. Two of the most powerful at this time were ‘Abdu Shams and 
Makhzum. ‘Utbah and his brother Shaybah were the leaders of one branch 
of the Shamsite clan. Their cousin Harb, the former leader of its Umayyad 
branch, had been succeeded on his death by his son Abu Sufyan, who had 
married, amongst other wives, ‘Utbah’s daughter Hind. Abu Sufyan’s 
success, both in politics and in trade, was partly due to his reserve of 
judgement and his capacity for cold and patient deliberation - and also 
forbearance, if his astute sense of opportunity saw that an advantage could 
thereby be gained. His cool-headedness was a frequent cause of exaspera¬ 
tion for the impetuous and quick-tempered Hind, but he seldom if ever 
allowed her to sway him once his mind was made up. As might have been 
expected, he was less violent than Abu Jahl in his hostility towards the 
Prophet. 

But if the leaders of Quraysh differed somewhat from each other in their 
attitude towards the Messenger, they were unanimous in their rejection of 
the message itself. Having all attained a certain success in life - though the 
younger men hoped that for them this was merely the beginning - they had 
by common consent achieved something of what had come to be accepted 
in Arabia as the ideal of human greatness. Wealth was not held to be an 
aspect of that greatness, but it was in fact almost a necessity as a means to 
the end. A great man must be greatly in demand as an ally and a protector, 
which meant that he must himself have reliable allies. This he could partly 
contrive by weaving for himself, through his own marriages and the 
marriages of his sons and his daughters, a network of powerful and 
formidable connections. Much in this respect could be achieved by wealth, 


Tab. 1203, 3. 



66 Muhammad 


which the great man also needed in his capacity as host. The virtues were 
an essential aspect of the ideal in question, especially the virtue of 
generosity, but not with a view to any heavenly reward. To be extolled by 
men, throughout all Arabia and perhaps beyond, for lavish bounty, for 
leonine courage, for unfailing fidelity to one’s word, whether it had been 
given for alliance, protection, guarantee or any other purpose - to be 
extolled for these virtues in life and after death was the honour and the 
immortality which seemed to them to give life its meaning. Men like Walld 
felt certain of such greatness; and this generated in them a complacence 
which made them deaf to a message that stressed the vanity of earthly life - 
the vanity of the very setting where their own success had taken place. 
Their immortality depended on Arabia remaining as it was, on Arab ideals 
being perpetuated from the past into the future. They were all sensitive, in 
varying degrees, to the beauty of the language of the Revelation; but as to 
its meaning, their souls spontaneously closed themselves to such verses as 
the following, which told them that they and their honoured forefathers 
had achieved nothing, and that all their efforts had been misplaced: This 
lower life is but a diversion and a game; and verily the abode of the 
Hereafter, that, that is Life, did they but know} 


1 XXIX, 64. 



XXIII 


Wonderment and 
Hope 


T HE young and the less successful did not by any means all accept the 
Divine message forthwith; but at least complacency had not block¬ 
ed their hearing against the sharpness and vehemence of the sum¬ 
mons, which had broken upon their little world as with the notes of a 
clarion. The voice that ‘Uthman had heard crying in the desert “Sleepers 
awake” was akin to the message itself and for those who now accepted the 
message it was indeed as if they had awakened from a sleep and had 
entered upon a new life. 

The disbelievers’ attitude, past and present, was summed up in the 
words: There is naught hut the life of this world . . . and we shall not he 
raised . 1 To this came the Divine answers: Not in play did We create the 
heavens and the earth and all that is between them 2 and Deem ye that We 
did hut create you in vain and that ye shall not be brought back unto Usf 3 
For those in whom disbelief had not crystallised, these words rang with 
truth; and so it was with the Revelation as a whole, which described itself 
as being a light and having in itself the power to guide. A parallel 
imperative cause for accepting the message was the Messenger himself, a 
man who was, they were certain, too full of truth to deceive and too full of 
wisdom to be self-deceived. The Message contained a warning and a 
promise: the warning impelled them to take action, and the promise filled 
them with joy. 

Verily those who say: “Our Lord is God”, and who then follow straight 
His path, on them descend the Angels saying: “Fear not nor grieve, but 
hearken to good tidings of the Paradise which ye are promised. We are 
your protecting friends in this lower life, and in the Hereafter wherein ye 
shall be given that which your souls long for, that which ye pray for, in 
bounty from Him who is All-Forgiving, All-Merciful ” A 

Another of the many verses about Paradise which had now been revealed 
was one which spoke of the Garden of Immortality which is promised to 

1 VI, z 9 . 2 XXI, 16; XLIV, 38. * XXIII, 115. « XL I, 30-2. 



68 Muhammad 


the pious. Of this it said: For them therein is that which they desire, for ever 
and ever-a promise that thy Lord hath bound Himself to fulfil . 1 

The true believers are defined as they who set their hopes on meeting Us, 
whereas the disbelievers are they who set not their hopes on meeting Us, 
and who are satisfied with this lower life and find their deepest peace 
therein, and fail to treat Our signs as signs . 2 The believer’s attitude must be 
the opposite in every way. An aspect of the dreamlike illusion in which the 
infidels were sunk was to take for granted the blessings of nature. To be 
awake to reality meant not only shifting one’s hopes from this world to the 
next but also marvelling in this world at the signs of God which here are 
manifest. Blessed is He who hath placed in the heavens the constellations 
of the zodiac, and hath placed therein a lamp and a light-giving moon. And 
He it is who hath made the night and the day to succeed one the other, as a 
sign for him who would reflect or give thanks' 

The leaders of Quraysh had asked defiantly for signs such as the descent 
of an Angel to confirm the prophethood of Muhammad, and the rising of 
Muhammad up to Heaven. On one occasion, a night of the full moon, not 
long after it had risen, when it was to be seen hanging in the sky above 
Mount Hira’, a body of disbelievers approached the Prophet and asked 
him to split the moon in two as a sign that he was indeed the Messenger of 
God. Many others were also present, including believers and hesitants, and 
when the demand was made all eyes were turned towards the luminary. 
Great was their amazement to see it divide into two halves which drew 
away from each other until there was a half moon shining brightly on 
either side of the mountain. “Bear ye witness,” the Prophet said/ But those 
who had made the demand rejected this optic miracle as mere magic, 5 
saying that he had cast a spell over them. The believers, on the other hand, 
rejoiced, and some of the hesitants entered Islam, while others came nearer 
to doing so. 

This immediate heavenly response to a derisive challenge was an 
exception. Others of the signs demanded by Quraysh were in fact given, 
but not exactly as they had asked, and not in their time but in God’s. There 
were also many lesser miracles which only the believers witnessed. But 
such wonders were never allowed to stand in the centre, for the revealed 
Book itself was the central miracle of the Divine intervention now taking 
place, just as Christ had been the central miracle of the preceding interven¬ 
tion. According to the Koran, Jesus is both Messenger of God and also His 
Word which He cast unto Mary, and a Spirit from Him ; 6 and as it had been 
with the Word-made-flesh, so now analogously, it was through the Divine 
Presence in this world of the Word-made-book that Islam was a religion in 
the true sense of bond or link with the Hereafter. One of the functions of 
the Word-made-book, with a view to the primordial religion that Islam 
claimed to be, 7 was to reawaken in man his primeval sense of wonderment 
which, with the passage of time, had become dimmed or misdirected. 
Therefore when Quraysh ask for marvels the Koran’s main response is to 
point to those which they have always had before their eyes without seeing 
the wonder of them: 

1 XXV, 15-16. 1 X, 9. 3 XXV, 61-2 4 B.LXI,2 4 . 

5 K.LIV, 1-2. 6 IV, 171. 7 XXX, 30. 



W onderment and Hope 69 


Will they not behold the camels, how they are created? 
And the firmament, how it is raised aloft? 

And the mountains, how they are established? 

i-i _ l _ 


Wonderment and Hope 69 


Will they not behold the camels, how they are created? 

And the firmament, how it is raised aloft? 

And the mountains, how they are established? 

And the earth, how it is spread?' 

The wonderment and hope demanded of the believer are both attitudes 
of return to God. The sacrament of thanksgiving, to say Praise be to God 
the Lord of the worlds , includes wonder and takes the thing praised, and 
with it the praiser, back to the Transcendent Origin of all good. The 
sacrament of consecration, to say In the Name of God , the Infinitely 
Good , the All-Merciful , precipitates the soul in the same direction upon 
the stream of hope. On this path of return the basic prayer of Islam is 
centred, al-Fatihah , the Opening, so called because it is the first chapter 
of the Koran: 


Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds, 

The Infinitely Good, the All-Merciful, 

Master of the day of judgement. 

Thee we worship, and in Thee we seek help. 

Guide us upon the straight path, 
the path of those on whom Thy grace is, 
not those on whom Thine anger is, 
nor those who are astray .' 

Also basic as a perfect and concentrated expression of the doctrine of 
Islam is the Surat al-Ikhlas , the Chapter of Sincerity, which is placed at the 
end of the Koran, the last surah but two, and which was revealed when an 
idolater asked the Prophet to describe his Lord: 

Say: He, God, is One, 

God, the Self-Sufficient Besought of all. 

He begetteth not, nor is begotten, 
and none is like Him . 1 2 * 4 


1 LXXXVIII, 17-20. 

2 First in order of final arrangement but not of revelation. Its place in the Islamic liturgy 

ensures that it is recited at least seventeen times every day. 

1 1,2-7. 4 CXII. 



XXIV 


Family Divisions 


T ALIB and ‘Aqll, the elder sons of Abu Talib, had not followed the 
example of their younger brothers Ja £ far and ‘All, but had remained 
like their father unconverted yet tolerant. Very different was the 
attitude of Abu Lahab: since the recent confrontation with the leaders of 
Quraysh he had become openly hostile; and his wife Umm Jamil, the sister 
of the Shamsite leader Abu Sufyan, had conceived a hatred for the Prophet. 
Between them they compelled their two sons to repudiate Ruqayyah and 
Umm Kulthum - it is not certain whether the marriages had already taken 
place, or whether they were still only betrothed. But Umm Jamil’s 
satisfaction at this rupture was diminished when she heard that her 
wealthy Umayyad cousin, ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, had asked for the hand of 
Ruqayyah and had married her. This marriage was most pleasing to the 
Prophet and Khadljah. Their daughter was happy and their new son-in- 
law was devoted to her and to them. There was also another consideration 
which impelled them to give thanks: Ruqayyah was the most beautiful of 
their daughters and one of the most beautiful women of her generation 
throughout all Mecca; and ‘Uthman was a remarkably handsome man. To 
see the two of them together was in itself a reason for rejoicing. “God is 
Beautiful and he loveth beauty”. 1 Not long after their marriage, when they 
were both absent from Mecca, the Prophet sent them a messenger, who 
returned considerably later than he was expected. When he began to 
proffer his excuses the Prophet cut him short, saying: “I will tell thee, if 
thou wilt, what hath kept thee: thou didst stand there gazing at ‘Uthman 
and Ruqayyah and marvelling at their beauty.” 2 

The Prophet’s aunt Arwa now made up her mind to enter Islam. The 
immediate cause of her decision was her son Tulayb, a youth of fifteen, 
who had recently made his profession of faith in the house of Arqam. 
When he told his mother she said: “If we could do what men can do, we 
would protect our brother’s son.” But Tulayb refused to accept such 
vagueness. “What preventeth thee,” he said, “from entering Islam and 
following him? Thy brother Hamzah hath done so.” And when she made 
her usual excuse about waiting for her sisters he cut her short, saying: “I 
beg thee by God to go and greet him and say thou believest in him and 
testify that There is no god but God” She did what he had said; and, 
having done so, she took courage, and rebuked her brother Abu Lahab for 
his treatment of their nephew. 

1 Saying of the Prophet, A.H. IV, 133-4. 2 S. 105. 



Family Divisions 71 

As to Khadljah’s relatives, no sooner had Islam become known in Mecca 
than her half brother Nawfal became one of its worst and most violent 
enemies. This did not, however, prevent his son Aswad from entering the 
religion which was for Khadljah a compensation for Nawfal’s enmity. But 
it was a disappointment that her favourite nephew, the Shamsite Abu 
l-‘As, already for some years her son-in-law, had not entered Islam as his 
wife Zaynab had done; and great presssure was now being put upon him 
by the leaders of his clan and others to divorce her. They went so far as to 
suggest that he should look for the richest, best-connected and most 
beautiful bride available in Mecca, and they promised, on condition of his 
divorce, that they would unite their efforts towards arranging the marriage 
in question. But Zaynab and Abu l-‘As loved each other deeply: she always 
hoped and prayed that he would join her in Islam; and he, for his part, 
firmly told his clansmen that he already had the wife of his choice and that 
he wanted none other. Hakim, another of Khadljah’s nephews - her 
brother Hizam’s son who nearly twenty years previously had made her a 
present of Zayd - retained like Abu l-‘As his affection for his aunt and her 
household without renouncing the gods of Quraysh; but Hakim’s brother 
Khalid entered Islam. 

Verily thou guidest not whom thou lovest, but God guideth whom He 
will. 1 The truth expressed in this verse is repeated continually through the 
Koran. But if such Revelations helped to ease the weight of the Prophet’s 
sense of responsibility, they did not prevent him from being sad at the 
averseness of his Makhzumite cousin ‘Abd Allah; and another such case, 
which perhaps caused him even more sadness was that of his uncle 
Harith’s son, Abu Sufyan, his foster-brother, cousin and one-time friend. 
He had hoped that he would respond to his message, whereas on the 
contrary the message made a rift between them, and Abu Sufyan’s 
aloofness and coldness increased as time went on, perhaps through the 
influence of their uncle Abu Lahab. Others also were made to feel the truth 
of the above-quoted verse: Abu Bakr had been followed into Islam by his 
wife Umm Rum an, and by ‘Abd Allah and Asma’, his son and daughter by 
another wife presumably now dead. Umm Ruman had just borne him a 
second daughter whom they named ‘A’ishah and who was, like Zayd’s son 
Usamah, one of the first children to be born into Islam. But although Abu 
Bakr had been responsible for so many conversions he was unable to 
convert his own eldest son, ‘Abd al-Ka‘bah, who resisted all the attempts 
of his father and his mother - he was Umm Ruman’s son - to persuade him 
to enter their religion. 

If the believers had disappointments, their opponents had the vexation 
of feeling themselves face to face with a new and incalculable presence in 
Mecca which threatened to disrupt their way of life and frustrate all their 
projects for the future, especially those which related to planning the 
marriages of their children. The Bani Makhzum had been gratified when 
their clansmen ‘Abd Allah had so sharply opposed his cousin Muhammad 
in the Assembly. ‘Abd Allah’s brother Zuhayr, though somewhat less 
hostile to the new religion, had also refused to enter it. Like ‘Abd Allah, he 


XXVIII, 57. 



yz Muhammad 

was the son of ‘Atikah, the daughter of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, but their now 
dead father had had a second wife also named ‘Atikah, who had borne 
him a daughter. Hind, for so she was named, was a woman of great 
beauty, now in her nineteenth year, and she had not long been married 
to the cousin of her two half-brothers, Abu Salamah of the other branch 
of Makhzum. The whole clan was pleased at this link between their two 
branches. Great, therefore, was their dismay when Abu Salamah’s Islam 
became known; and this dismay was doubled when Hind — or Umm 
Salamah, as she is always called — instead of leaving her husband became 
like him one of the most devoted followers of the Prophet. 

On the death of Abu Salamah’s father, his mother Barrah had married a 
man of the Quraysh clan of ‘Amir by whom she had had a second son, 
known as Abu Sabrah. Suhayl, the chief of ‘Amir, had recently given Abu 
Sabrah his daughter Umm Kulthum in marriage. Barrah, unlike her sister 
Arwa, had not yet entered Islam; but Abu Sabrah was subject to its 
influence not only through his half-brother Abu Salamah but also through 
his stepmother, his father’s second wife Maymunah. It was to Maymunah 
and her three sisters, the wives of ‘Abbas, Hamzah and Ja‘far, that the 
Prophet referred when he said: “Verily the sisters are true believers”; 1 and 
Maymunah’s marriage brought to the clan of ‘Amir a powerful presence of 
faith. 

Suhayl had another daughter, Sahlah, whom he had given to Abu 
Hudhayfah, the son of the Shamsite leader ‘Utbah. ‘Amir had of late been 
rapidly increasing in power, and this marriage was thought to be an 
advantageous one by both the clans concerned. Not long afterwards, 
however, the couple entered Islam; they were followed, or preceded, by the 
other couple, Abu Sabrah and Umm Kulthum. Suhayl thus lost two 
daughters to the new religion, and two carefully chosen sons-in-law. He 
likewise lost his three brothers, Hatib, Sallt and Sakran, and Sakran’s wife, 
their cousin Sawdah, But, worst of all from Suhayl’s point of view, his 
eldest son, ‘Abd Allah, also became a devout follower of the Prophet. ‘Abd 
Allah had hopes that his father might one day join them, and these hopes 
were shared by the Prophet himself, for Suhayl was a man of more piety 
and intelligence than most of the other leaders, and had even been known 
to make spiritual retreats. But as yet he showed himself hostile to the new 
faith, not violently but none the less resolutely, and his children’s 
disobedience seemed to have a hardening effect upon him. 

In ‘Abdu Shams, Abu Hudhayfah was not the only son of a leader to defy 
parental authority. Khalid, who had dreamed of the Prophet saving him 
from the fire, had kept his Islam secret, but his father heard of it and 
ordered him to renounce it. Khalid said: “I will die sooner than forsake the 
religion of Muhammad”, 2 whereupon he was beaten unmercifully and 
imprisoned in a room without food or drink. But after three days he 
escaped, and his father disowned him without taking further action. 
‘Utbah was characteristically less violent and more patient with Abu 
Hudhayfah, who for his part was attached to his father and hoped that he 
would come to see the errors of idolatry. 


I.S. VIII, zo 3 . 


2 i.s. IV 1 ,68. 



Family Divisions 73 

As to the Umayyad branch of ‘Abdu Shams, in addition to the Islam of 
‘Uthman and his marriage to Ruqayyah, there were other serious losses. 
Many of their confederates of the Bani Asad ibn Khuzaymah had likewise 
professed their faith in the new religion, fourteen in number including the 
Jahsh family who, as cousins of the Prophet, were no doubt the leaders. 
With these valued confederates Abu Sufyan the Umayyad chief lost also his 
own daughter, Umm Habibah, whom he had married to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn 
Jahsh, the younger brother of ‘Abd Allah. 

In the clan of ‘Adi, in one of its chief families, the power of the tie of truth 
to break lesser ties had been prefigured in the last generation. Nufayl had 
had two sons, Khattab and ‘Amr, by two different wives; and on the death 
of Nufayl the mother of Khattab married her stepson ‘Amr and bore him a 
son whom they named Zayd. Khattab and Zayd were thus half-brothers 
on their mother’s side. Zayd was one of the few men who, like Waraqah, 
saw the idolatrous practices of Quraysh for what they were; and not only 
did he refuse to take part in them himself, but he even refused to eat 
anything that had been sacrificed to idols. He proclaimed that he worship¬ 
ped the God of Abraham, and he did not hesitate to rebuke his people in 
public. Khattab, on the other hand, was a staunch adherent of the 
inveterate practices of Quraysh and he was scandalised by Zayd’s disre¬ 
spect for the gods and goddesses that they worshipped. So he persecuted 
him to the point of forcing him to leave the hollow of Mecca and to live in 
the hills above it; and he even organised a band of young men whom he 
instructed not to allow Zayd to approach the Sanctuary. The outcast 
thereupon left the Hijaz and went as far as Mosul in the north of Iraq and 
from there south-west into Syria, always questioning monks and rabbis 
about the religion of Abraham, until finally he met a monk who told him 
that the time was now near when there would come forth, in the very 
country he had left, a Prophet who would preach the religion he was 
seeking. Zayd then retraced his steps, but on his way through the territory 
of Lakhm on the southern border of Syria he was attacked and killed. 
When Waraqah heard of his death, he wrote an elegy in praise of him. The 
Prophet also praised him and said that on the day of the Resurrection “he 
will be raised as having, in himself alone, the worth of a whole people.” 1 

Many years had now passed since Zayd’s death: Khattab also was dead, 
and his son ‘Umar was on good terms with Zayd’s son SaTd, who had 
married ‘Umar’s sister Fatimah. The rift between the two branches of the 
family had closed. But with the coming of Islam SaTd was one of the first to 
join it, whereas ‘Umar, whose mother was the sister of Abu Jahl, became 
one of its fiercest opponents. Fatimah followed her husband, but they did 
not dare to tell her brother, knowing his violent nature. ‘Umar was beset by 
Islam on another side also: his wife Zaynab was the sister of ‘Uthman the 
son of Maz‘un of the clan of Jumah; and this ‘Uthman was by nature an 
ascetic and had had tendencies towards monotheism before the descent of 
the Revelation. He and his two brothers were among the first to respond to 
it; and they and Zaynab had also three nephews who had entered Islam. Of 
Zaynab herself, ‘Umar’s wife, nothing is recorded at this stage, no doubt 


II. MS- 



74 Muhammad 

because, wherever her sympathies lay, she had powerful reasons for 
keeping them a secret. Her brother ‘Uthman was even more uncompromis¬ 
ing than ‘Umar, though he was less violent. 

Zaynab and her brothers were younger cousins of the chief of their clan, 
Umayyah ibn Khalaf, who was one of the most implacable enemies of 
Islam, as were his immediate family. It was his brother Ubayy who one day 
took a decayed bone to the Prophet and said: “Claimest though, Mu¬ 
hammad, that God can bring this to life?” Then with a disdainful smile he 
crumbled the bone in his hand and blew the fragments into the face of the 
Messenger, who said: “Even so, that do I claim: He will raise it, and thee 
too when thou art as that now is; then will He enter thee into the fire.” 1 It is 
to Ubayy that the following Revelation refers: He forgot his own created- 
ness and said: Who will give life to bones when they are rotten? Say: He 
who gave them being the first time will give them life again . 1 


1 II139. 


2 XXXVI, 78. 



XXV 


The Hour 


O NE of the disbelievers’ most frequent contentions was that if God 
had truly had a message for them he would have sent an Angel. To 
this the Koran replied: If the angels walked at their ease upon 
earth, verily We had sent down upon them an angel messenger? The 
descent of Gabriel from time to time did not make him a Messenger in the 
Koranic sense of the term. For that, it was necessary to be stationed upon 
earth amongst the people to whom the message was to be unfolded. The 
Revelation also said: They who place not their hopes in meeting Us say: 
Why are the angels not sent down unto usf Or why see we not our Lord ? 
Verily they are proud with pride in themselves, and arrogant with a great 
arrogance. The day they behold the angels, on that day there will be no 
good tidings for the evil-doers, and they will say: A barrier that bars ! 1 That 
is, they will call, but in vain, for the barrier to be put back between Heaven 
and earth. That will be the end, when the direct contact with Heaven will 
cause the earthly conditions of time and space to be obliterated and the 
earth itself to disintegrate. The day men shall be like scattered moths, and 
the mountains float like tufts of wool? And A day that shall turn the hair of 
children grey . 4 This end is continually heralded throughout the Koran. It is 
the Hour , which is near at hand — the heavens and the earth are pregnant 
with it? Its moment has not yet come, and when the scriptures speak of it as 
near it must be remembered that verily a day in the sight of thy Lord is as a 
thousand years of what ye count . 6 But the period of the message is none the 
less an anticipation of the Hour. 

This is according to the nature of things, not of earthly things in 
themselves, but in a wider context. For if there is a Divine intervention to 
establish a new religion there is necessarily a passage through the barrier 
between Heaven and earth, not so great an opening as would transform 
earthly conditions but enough to make the time of the Prophet’s mission 
altogether exceptional, as had been the times of Jesus and Moses and 
Abraham and Noah. The Koran says of the Night of Worth, Laylat 
al-Qadr , the night when Gabriel came to Muhammad in the cave on 
Mount Hira’: The Night of Worth is better than a thousand months. In it 
the angels descend, and the Spirit? And something of that peerlessness 
necessarily overflowed into the whole period of the intercourse between 
the Prophet and the Archangel. 

1 XVII, 95 - 2 XXV, 21-2. 3 Cl, 4-5. 4 LXXIII, 17. 

3 VII, 187. 6 XXII, 47. 7 XCVII, 3—4. 



j 6 Muhammad 

To anticipate the Hour is to anticipate the Judgement: and the Koran 
had recently declared itself to be al-Furqdn , l the Criterion, the Discrimina¬ 
tion. The same must apply to every revealed Scripture for a Revelation is a 
presence of the Eternal in the ephemeral, and that otherworldly presence 
precipitates something of a final judgement. This meant that in many cases, 
quite independently of what the Prophet himself might prophesy, the 
ultimate destinies of Paradise or Hell became clearly apparent. Hidden 
depths of good and evil were summoned to the surface. The presence of the 
Messenger was also bound to work a parallel effect, for the attractive 
power of his guidance measured out the full perversity of those who 
resisted it, while drawing those who accepted it into the very orbit of his 
own perfection. 

It was immediately understandable that the Revelation should cause the 
good to excel themselves. But it was not only distressing but also perplex¬ 
ing to many of the believers that some of those whom they had always 
looked on as not bad should suddenly become unquestionably evil. The 
Koran tells them that they must expect this, for its verses increase the 
opposition of its worst opponents. 

Verily We have given them in this Koran ample reason to take heed, yet 

it doth but increase them in aversion. 2 

We give them cause to fear, yet it doth but increase them in monstrous 

outraged 

No one had been previously aware of the fundamental nature of Abu 
Lahab; and, to take another example, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf had even 
been something of a friend of the chief of Jumah, Umayy ah ibn Khalaf. The 
Koran offers an exalted parallel in telling how Noah complained to God 
that his message only served to widen the gap between himself and the 
majority of his people, and to lead them yet further astray. 4 

3 This is the title of Surah XXV. 

2 XVII, 41. J XVII, 60. 4 LXXI, 6 . 



XXVI 


Three Questions 


AT every assembly of Quraysh there was at least some discussion of 
Z\ what seemed to them their greatest problem; and they now decided 
JL JL to send to Yathrib to consult the Jewish rabbis: “Ask them about 
Muhammad,” they said to their two envoys. “Describe him to them, and 
tell them what he says; for they are the people of the first scripture, and 
they have knowledge of the Prophets which we have not.” The rabbis sent 
back the answer: “Question him about three things wherein we will 
instruct you. If he tell you of them, then is he a Prophet sent by God, but if 
he tell you not, then is the man a forger of falsehood. Ask him of some 
young men who left their folk in the days of old, how it was with them, for 
theirs is a tale of wonder; and ask him tidings of a far traveller who reached 
the ends of the earth in the east and in the west; and ask him of the Spirit, 
what it is. If he tell you of these things, then follow him, for he is a 
Prophet.” 

When the envoys returned to Mecca with their news, the leaders of 
Quraysh sent to the Prophet and asked him the three questions. He said: 
“Tomorrow I will tell you,” but he did not say “if God will”; and when 
they came for the answers he had to put them off, and so it went on day by 
day until fifteen nights had passed and still he had received no Revelation 
of any kind, neither had Gabriel come to him since they had questioned 
him. The people of Mecca taunted him, and he was distressed by what they 
said and greatly saddened that he had not received the help he had hoped 
for. Then Gabriel brought him a Revelation reproaching him for his 
distress on account of what his people said, and telling him the answers to 
their three questions. The long wait he had had to endure was explained in 
the words: And say not of anything: verily I shall do that tomorrow , except 
thou sayest: if God will . 1 

But the delay of this Revelation, although painful to the Prophet and his 
followers, was in reality an added strength. His worst enemies refused to 
draw conclusions from it, but for those many of Quraysh who were in two 
minds it was a powerful corroboration of his claim that the Revelation 
came to him from Heaven and that he had no part in it and no control over 
it. Was it conceivable that if Muhammad had invented the earlier Revela¬ 
tions he could have delayed so long before inventing this latest one, 
especially when so much appeared to be at stake? 

The believers drew strength also, as always, from the Revelation itself. 


1 XVIII, 23-4. 



yS Muhammad 

When Quraysh asked for the story of the youths who left their folk in the 
days of old — a story which no one in Mecca had ever heard — they did not 
know that it would have a bearing on the present situation, to their own 
discredit and to the credit of the believers. It is often called the story of the 
sleepers of Ephesus, for it was there, in the middle of the third century ad, 
that some young men had remained faithful to the worship of the One God 
when their people had fallen away into idolatry and were persecuting them 
for not following them. To escape from this persecution they took refuge in 
a cave, where they were miraculously put to sleep for over 300 years. 

In addition to what the Jews already knew, the Koranic narrative 1 told of 
details that no human eye had seen, such as how the sleepers looked as they 
slept their unwitnessed sleep in their cave throughout the centuries, and 
how their faithful dog lay with his front paws stretched over the threshold. 

As to the second question, the great traveller is named Dhu 1 -Qarnayn, 
he of the two horns. The Revelation mentions his journey to the far west 
and to the far east, and then, answering more than was asked, it tells of a 
mysterious third journey to a place between two mountains where the 
people begged him to make a barrier that would protect them from Gog 
and Magog and other jinn who were devastating their land; and God gave 
him power to confine the evil spirits within a space from which they will 
not emerge until a divinely appointed day, 2 when, according to the 
Prophet, they will work terrible destruction over the face of the earth. 
Their breaking forth would take place before the final Hour, but it would 
be one of the signs that the end was near. 

In answer to the third question, the Revelation affirmed the Spirit’s 
transcendence over the mind of man, which is incapable of grasping it: 
They will question thee concerning the Spirit. Say: the Spirit proceedeth 
from the command of my Lord; and ye have not been given knowledge, 
save only a little. 3 

The Jews had been very eager to hear what answers Muhammad had 
given to their questions; and, with regard to this last sentence about 
knowledge, they asked him, at their first opportunity, if it referred to his 
people or to them. “To both of you,” said the Prophet, whereupon they 
protested that they had been given knowledge of all things, for they had 
read the Torah in which was an exposition of everything, as the Koran 
itself affirmed. 4 The Prophet answered: “That all is but little in respect of 
God’s Own Knowledge; yet have ye therein enough for your needs, if ye 
would but practise it.” 5 It was then that there came the Revelation about 
the Words of God, which express merely a part of His knowledge: If all the 
trees in the earth were pens, and if the sea eked out by seven seas more were 
ink, the Words of God could not be written out unto their end . 6 

The leaders of Quraysh had not bound themselves to take the advice of the 
rabbis, nor did the rabbis themselves recognise the Prophet, despite his 
having answered their questions beyond all their expectations. But the 
answers served to convert others; and the more his followers increased, the 
more his opponents felt that their community and their way of life was in 

1 XVIII, 9-25. 2 XVIII, 93-9. 3 XVII, 85. 

4 VI, 154. 5 I.I.198. « XXXI, 27. 



Three Questions 79 

clanger, and the more resolutely they organised their persecution of all 
those converts who could be ill-treated with impunity. Each clan dealt with 
its own Muslims: they would imprison them and torment them with 
beating and hunger and thirst; and they would stretch them out on the 
sun-baked earth of Mecca when the heat was at its height, to make them 
renounce their religion. 

The chief of Jumah, Umayyah, had an African slave named Bilal who 
was a firm believer. Umayyah would take him out at noon into an open 
space, and would have him pinned to the ground with a large rock on his 
chest, swearing that he should stay like that until he died, or until he 
renounced Muhammad and worshipped al-Lat and al-‘Uzzah. While he 
endured this Bilal would say “One, One”; and it happened that the aged 
Waraqah came past when he was suffering this torment and repeating 
“One, One.” “It is indeed One, One, O Bilal,” said Waraqah. Then, 
turning to Umayyah, he said: “I swear by God that if ye kill him thus I will 
make his grave a shrine.” 

Not every man of Quraysh lived amongst his own clan, and Abu Bakr 
had acquired a house amongst the dwellings of the Bani Jumah. This 
meant that they had more opportunities of seeing the Prophet than most 
other clans, for he used to visit Abu Bakr every afternoon; and it is said that 
part of a Prophet’s message is always written on his face. The face of Abu 
Bakr was also something of a book; and his presence in that quarter of 
Mecca, previously welcomed as an asset by the whole clan, was now a 
source of anxiety to its leaders. It was through him that Bilal had entered 
Islam; and, when he saw how they were torturing him, he said to 
Umayyah: “Hast thou no fear of God, to treat this poor man thus?” “It is 
thou who hast corrupted him,” retorted Umayyah, “so save him from 
what thou seest.” “I will,” said Abu Bakr. “I have a black youth who is 
tougher and sturdier than he, a man of thy religion. Him will I give thee for 
Bilal.” Umayyah agreed, and Abu Bakr took Bilal and set him free. 

He had already set free six others, the first one being ‘Amir ibn 
Fuhayrah, a man of great spiritual strength, who had been one of the 
earliest converts. ‘Amir was a shepherd and after he was freed he took 
charge of Abu Bakr’s flocks. Another of those whom he set free was a slave 
girl belonging to ‘Umar. She had entered Islam, and ‘Umar was beating her 
to make her renounce it, when Abu Bakr happened to pass by and asked 
him if he would sell her to him. ‘Umar agreed, whereupon Abu Bakr 
bought her and set her free. 

Among the most relentless of the persecutors was Abu Jahl. If a convert 
had a powerful family to'defend him, Abu Jahl would merely insult him 
and promise to ruin his reputation and make him a laughing-stock. If he 
were a merchant he would threaten to stop his trade by organising a 
general boycott of his goods so that he would be ruined. If he were weak 
and unprotected and of his own clan he would have him tortured; and he 
had powerful allies in many other clans whom he could persuade to do the 
same with their own weak and unprotected converts. 

It was through him that his clansmen tortured three of their poorer 
confederates, Yasir and Sumayyah and their son ‘Ammar. They refused to 
renounce Islam, and Sumayyah died under the sufferings they inflicted on 



80 Muhammad 

her. But some of the victims of Makhzum and of other clans could not 
endure what they were made to suffer, and their persecutors reduced them 
to a state when they could agree to anything. It was said to them: ‘‘Are not 
al-Lat and al-‘Uzzah your gods as well as Allah?” They would say yes; and 
if a beetle crawled past them and they were asked “Is not this beetle your 
god as well as Allah?” they would say yes simply in order to escape from a 
pain they could not endure. 

These recantations were on the lips, not in the heart. But those who had 
made them could no longer practise Islam except in the greatest privacy, 
and some of them had no privacy at all. There was, however, an example 
for them in the recently revealed story of the young men who had left their 
people and taken refuge in God rather than submit to worshipping other 
gods. And when the Prophet saw that although he escaped persecution 
himself many of his followers did not, he said to them: “If ye went to the 
country of the Abyssinians, ye would find there a king under whom none 
suffereth wrong. It is a land of sincerity in religion. Until such time as God 
shall make for you a means of relief from what ye now are suffering.” 1 So 
some of his companions set off for Abyssinia; and this was the first 
emigration in Islam. 

1 I.I.208. 



XXVII 


Abyssinia 


T HE emigrants were well received in Abyssinia, and were allowed 
complete freedom of worship. In all, not counting the small children 
they took with them, they were about eighty in number; but they did 
not all go at the same time. Their flight was secretly planned and carried 
out unobtrusively in small groups. Their families would and could have 
stopped it, if they had known about it; but the move had been totally 
unexpected, and they failed to realise what had happened until the 
believers had all reached their destination. The leaders of Quraysh, 
however, were none the less determined that they should not be left in 
peace, to establish there, beyond their control, a dangerous community 
which might be increased tenfold if other converts joined them. So they 
speedily thought out a plan, and made ready a quantity of presents of a 
kind that the Abyssinians were known to value most. Leatherwork they 
prized above all, so a large number of fine skins were collected, enough to 
make a rich bribe for every one of the Negus’s generals. There were also 
rich gifts for the Negus himself. Then they carefully chose two men, one of 
whom was ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, of the clan of Sahm. Quraysh told them exactly 
what to do: they were to approach each of the generals separately, give him 
his present, and say: “Some foolish young men and women of our people 
have taken refuge in this kingdom. They have left their own religion, not 
for yours, but for one they have invented, one that is unknown to us and to 
yourselves. The nobles of their people have sent us to your king on their 
account, that he may send them home. So when we speak to him about 
them, counsel him to deliver them into our hands and have no words with 
them; for their people see best how it is with them.” The generals all 
agreed, and the two men of Quraysh took their presents to the Negus, 
asking that the emigrants should be given into their hands and explaining 
the reason as they had done to the generals, and finally adding: “The 
nobles of their people, who are their fathers, their uncles and their 
kinsmen, beg thee to restore them unto them.” The generals were present 
at the audience, and now with one voice they urged the Negus to comply 
with their request and give up the refugees, inasmuch as kinsmen are the 
best judges of the affairs of their kinsmen. But the Negus was displeased 
and said: “Nay, by God, they shall not be betrayed - a people that have 
sought my protection and made my country their abode and chosen me 
above all others! Give them up I will not, until I have summoned them and 
questioned them concerning what these men say of them. If it be as they 
have said, then will I deliver them unto them, that they may restore them to 



82 Muhammad 


their own people. But if not, then will I be their good protector so long as 
they seek my protection.” 

Then he sent for the companions of the Prophet, and at the same time he 
assembled his bishops, who brought with them their sacred books and 
spread them open round about the throne. ‘Amr and his fellow envoy had 
hoped to prevent this meeting between the Negus and the refugees, and it 
was indeed in their interests to prevent it, even more so than they realised. 
For they were unaware that while the Abyssinians tolerated them for 
commercial and political reasons they looked down on them as heathens 
and were conscious of a barrier between them. They themselves were 
Christians, many of them devout; they had been baptised, they worship¬ 
ped the One God, and they carried in their flesh the sacrament of the 
Eucharist. As such they were sensitive to the difference between the sacred 
and the profane, and they were keenly conscious of the profanity of men 
like ‘Amr. So much the more were they receptive — none more than the 
Negus himself - to the impression of holy earnestness and depth which was 
made on them by the company of believers who were now ushered into the 
throne room, and a murmur of wonderment arose from the bishops and 
others as they recognised that here were men and women more akin to 
themselves than to such of Quraysh as they had previously encountered. 
Moreover, most of them were young, and in many of them their piety of 
demeanour was enhanced by a great natural beauty. 

Not for all of them had the emigration been a necessity. ‘Uthman’s 
family had given up trying to make him recant, but the Prophet none the 
less allowed him to go and to take with him Ruqayyah. Their presence was 
a source of strength to the community of exiles. Another couple very 
pleasing to look upon were Ja‘far and his wife Asma’. They were well 
protected by Abu Talib; but the refugees needed a spokesman and Ja‘far 
was an eloquent speaker. He was also most winning in his person, and the 
Prophet said to him on one occasion: “Thou art like me in looks and in 
character.” 1 It was Ja‘far he had chosen to preside over the community of 
exiles; and his qualities of attraction and intelligence were amply seconded 
by Mus‘ab of ‘Abd ad-Dar, a young man whom the Prophet was later to 
entrust with a mission of immense importance in virtue of his natural gifts. 
Likewise remarkable was a young Makhzumite known as Shammas, 
whose mother was the sister of ‘Utbah. His name, which means “deacon”, 
was given him because on one occasion Mecca had been visited by a 
Christian dignitary of that rank, a man so exceptionally handsome as to 
arouse general admiration, whereupon ‘Utbah had said “I will show you a 
shammas more beautiful than he,” and he went and brought before them 
his sister’s son. Zubayr, Safiyyah’s son; was also present, and there were 
other cousins of the Prophet: Tulayb the son of Arwa; two sons of 
Umaymah, ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh and ‘Ubayd Allah together with ‘Ubayd 
Allah’s Umayyad wife Umm Habibah; and the two sons of Barrah, Abu 
Salamah and Abu Sabrah, both with their wives. It is from the beautiful 
Umm Salamah that most of the accounts of this first emigration have come 
down. 

1 I.S. IV/i, 24. 



Abyssinia 83 

When they were all assembled, the Negus spoke to them and said: 
“What is this religion wherein ye have become separate from your people, 
though ye have not entered my religion nor that of any other of the folk 
that surround us?” And Ja‘far answered him saying: “O King, we were a 
people steeped in ignorance, worshipping idols, eating unsacrificed car¬ 
rion, committing abominations, and the strong would devour the weak. 
Thus we were, until God sent us a Messenger from out of our midst, one 
whose lineage we knew, and his veracity and his worthiness of trust and his 
integrity. He called us unto God, that we should testify to His Oneness and 
worship Him and renounce what we and our fathers had worshipped in 
the way of stones and idols; and he commanded us to speak truly, to fulfil 
our promises, to respect the ties of kinship and the rights of our neigh¬ 
bours, and to refrain from crimes and from bloodshed. So we worship God 
alone, setting naught beside Him, counting as forbidden what He hath 
forbidden and as licit what He hath allowed. For these reasons have our 
people turned against us, and have persecuted us to make us forsake our 
religion and revert from the worship of God to the worship of idols. That is 
why we have come to thy country, having chosen thee above all others; and 
we have been happy in thy protection, and it is our hope, O King, that here, 
with thee, we shall not suffer wrong.” 

The royal interpreters translated all that he had said. The Negus then 
asked if they had with them any Revelation that their Prophet had brought 
them from God and, when Ja’far answered that they had, he said: “Then 
recite it to me,” whereupon Ja’far recited a passage from the Surah of 
Mary, which had been revealed shortly before their departure: 

And make mention of Mary in the Book, when she withdrew from her 
people unto a place towards the east, and secluded herself from them; 
and We sent unto her Our Spirit, and it appeared unto her in the likeness 
of a perfect man. She said: I take refuge from thee in the Infinitely Good, 
if any piety thou hast. He said: I am none other than a messenger from 
thy Lord, that I may bestow on thee a son most pure. She said: How can 
there be for me a son, when no man hath touched me, nor am I unchaste? 
He said: Even so shall it be; thy Lord saith: It is easy for Me. That We 
may make him a sign for mankind and a mercy from Us; and it is a thing 
ordained .' 

The Negus wept, and his bishops wept also, when they heard him recite, 
and when it was translated they wept again, and the Negus said: “This 
hath truly come from the same source as that which Jesus brought.” Then 
he turned to the two envoys of Quraysh and said: “Ye may go, for by God I 
will not deliver them unto you; they shall not be betrayed.” 

But when they had withdrawn from the royal presence, ‘Amr said to his 
companion: “Tomorrow I will tell him a thing that shall tear up this green 
growing prosperity of theirs by the roots. I will tell him that they aver that 
Jesus the son of Mary is a slave.” So the next morning he went to the Negus 
and said: “O King, they utter an enormous lie about Jesus the son of Mary. 


1 XIX, 16-21. 



84 Muhammad 

Do but send to them, and ask them what they say of him.” So he sent them 
word to come to him again and to tell him what they said of Jesus, 
whereupon they were troubled, for nothing of this kind had ever yet 
befallen them. They consulted together as to what they should reply when 
the question was put to them, though they all knew that they had no choice 
but to say what God had said. So when they entered the royal presence, and 
it was said to them: “What say ye of Jesus, the son of Mary?” Ja‘far 
answered: “We say of him what our Prophet brought unto us, that he is the 
slave of God and His Messenger and His Spirit and His Word which He 
cast unto Mary the blessed virgin.” The Negus took up a piece of wood and 
said: “Jesus the son of Mary exceedeth not what thou hast said by the 
length of this stick.” And when the generals round him snorted, he added: 
“For all your snorting.” Then he turned to Ja‘far and his companions and 
said: “Go your ways, for ye are safe in my land. Not for mountains of gold 
would I harm a single man of you”; and, with a movement of his hand 
towards the envoys of Quraysh, he said to his attendant: “Return unto 
these two men their gifts, for I have no use for them.” So ‘Amr and the 
other man went back ignominiously to Mecca. 

Meantime the news of what the Negus had said about Jesus spread 
among the people, and they were troubled and came out against him, 
asking for an explanation, and accusing him of having left their religion. 
He thereupon sent to Ja‘far and his companions and made ready boats for 
them and told them to embark and be ready to set sail if necessary. Then he 
took a parchment and wrote on it: “He testifieth that there is no god but 
God and that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger and that Jesus 
the son of Mary is His slave and His Messenger and His Spirit and His 
Word which He cast unto Mary.” Then he put it beneath his gown and 
went out to his people who were assembled to meet him. And he said to 
them: “Abyssinians, have I not the best claim to be your king?” They said 
that he had. “Then what phink ye of my life amongst you?” “It hath been 
the best of lives,” they answered. “Then what is it that troubleth you?” he 
said. “Thou hast left our religion,” they said, “and hast maintained that 
Jesus is a slave.” “Then what say ye of Jesus?” he asked. “We say that he is 
the son of God,” they answered. Then he put his hand on his breast, 
pointing to where the parchment was hidden, and testified to his belief in 
“this”, which they took to refer to their words. 1 So they were satisfied and 
went away, for they were happy under his rule, and only wished to be 
reassured; and the Negus sent word to Ja‘far and his companions that they 
could disembark and go back to their dwellings, where they went on living 
as before, in comfort and security. 


1 1.1.2.2.4. 



XXVIII 


‘Umar 


W HEN the two envoys returned to Mecca with the news that they 
had been rebuffed and that the Muslims had been established in 
the favour of the Negus, Quraysh were indignant and dismayed. 
They immediately set about intensifying their repression and persecution 
of the believers, largely under the direction of Abu Jahl, whose nephew 
‘Umar was one of the most violent and unrestrained in carrying out his 
instructions. ‘Umar was at this time about twenty-six years old, a head¬ 
strong young man, not easily deterred, and of great resolution. But unlike 
his uncle he was pious, and here in fact lay his chief motive for opposing the 
new religion. Khattab had brought him up to venerate the Ka‘bah and to 
respect everything that had come to be inseparably connected with it in the 
way of gods and goddesses. It was all woven together for him into a sacred 
unity that was not to be questioned and still less tampered with. Quraysh 
also had been one; but Mecca was now a city of two religions and two 
communities. He saw clearly, moreover, that the trouble had one cause 
only. Remove the man who was that cause, and everything would soon be 
as it had been before. There was no other remedy, but that would be a 
certain remedy. He continued to brood along these lines, and eventually 
the day came — it was soon after the return of the unsuccessful envoys from 
Abyssinia—when a sudden wave of anger goaded him to action, and taking 
up his sword he set out from his house. No sooner had he left it than he 
came face to face with Nu‘aym ibn ‘Abd Allah, one of his fellow clansmen. 
Nu‘aym had entered Islam, but he kept this a secret in fear of ‘Umar and 
others of his people. The grim expression which he now saw on ‘Umar’s 
face prompted him to ask him where he was going. “I am going to 
Muhammad, that renegade, who hath split Quraysh into two,” said 
‘Umar, “and I shall kill him.” Nu‘aym tried to stop him by pointing out 
that he himself would certainly be killed. But when he saw that ‘Umar was 
deaf to such an argument he thought of another way by which he might at 
least delay him, in time to give the alarm. This would mean betraying a 
secret of fellow Muslims who, like himself, were concealing their Islam; 
but he knew that they would forgive him, and even applaud him, in the 
circumstances. “O ‘Umar,” he said, “why not first go back to the people of 
thine own house, and set them to rights.” “What people of my house?” 
said ‘Umar. “Thy brother-in-law SaTd and thy sister Fatimah,” said 
Nu‘aym. “They are both followers of Muhammad in his religion. On thy 
head may it fall if thou let them be.” Without a word ‘Umar turned and 
made straight for his sister’s house. Now there was a poor confederate of 



86 Muhammad 


Zuhrah named Khabbab who often came to recite the Koran to Sa‘id and 
Fatimah; and he was with them at that moment with some written pages of 
the Surah named Td-Ha 1 which had just been revealed and which they 
were reading together. When they heard the voice of ‘Umar angrily calling 
out his sister’s name as he approached, Khabbab hid in a corner of the 
house, and Fatimah took the manuscript and put it under her gown. But 
‘Umar had heard the sound of their reading, and when he came in he said to 
them: “What was that jibbering I heard?” They tried to assure him he had 
heard nothing. “Hear it I did,” he said, “and I am told that ye both have 
become followers of Muhammad.” Then he set upon his brother-in-law 
Sa‘Id and grappled with him, and when Fatimah went to the defence of her 
husband, ‘Umar struck her a blow which broke the skin. “It is even so,” 
they said, “we are Muslims and we believe in God and in His Messenger. 
So do what thou wilt.” Fatimah’s wound was bleeding, and when ‘Umar 
saw the blood he was sorry for what he had done. A change came over him, 
and he said to his sister: “Give me that script that I even now heard you 
reading, that I may see what it is that Muhammad hath brought.” Like 
them, ‘Umar could read; but when he asked for the script she said, “We 
fear to trust thee with it.” “Fear not,” he said, and, unbuckling his 
sword-belt and laying down his sword, he swore by his gods that he would 
give it back when he had read it. She could see that he was softened, and she 
was filled with longing that he should enter Islam. “O my brother,” she 
said, “thou art impure in thine idolatry, and only the pure may touch it.” 
Thereupon ‘Umar went and washed himself, and she gave him the page on 
which was written the opening of Td-Ha . He began to read it, and when he 
had read a passage he said: “How beautiful and how noble are these 
words!” When Khabbab heard this he came out from his hiding-place and 
said: “ ‘Umar, I have hope that God hath chosen thee through the prayer of 
His Prophet, whom yesterday I heard pray: ‘O God, strengthen Islam with 
Abu 1 -Hakam the son of Hisham or with ‘Umar the son of Khattab!’ ” “O 
Khabbab,” said ‘Umar, “where will Muhammad now be, that I may go to 
him and enter Islam?” Khabbab told him that he was at the house of 
Arqam near the Safa Gate with many of his companions; and ‘Umar girt 
on his sword again and went to Safa, knocked at the door of the house, and 
said who he was. They had been warned by Nu‘aym, so that his coming 
was not unexpected, but they were struck by the subdued tone of his voice. 
One of the companions went to the door and looked through a chink and 
came back in some dismay. “O Messenger of God,” he said, “it is indeed 
‘Umar and he is girt with his sword.” “Let him come in,” said Hamzah. “If 
he hath come with good intent, we will give him a wealth of good; and if his 
intent be evil, we will slay him with his own sword.” The Prophet agreed 
that he should be admitted and, advancing to meet him, he seized him by 
the belt and pulled him into the middle of the room, saying: “What hath 
brought thee here, O son of Khattab? I cannot see thee desisting until God 
send down some calamity upon thee.” “O Messenger of God,” said ‘Umar, 
“I have come to thee that I may declare my faith in God, and in His 
Messenger and in what he hath brought from God.” “Allahu Arkbar (God 


1 XX. 



'Umar 87 

is Most Great),” said the Prophet, in such a way that every man and 
woman in the house knew that ‘Umar had entered Islam; and they all 
rejoiced. 1 

There was no question of ‘Umar’s keeping his Islam secret. He wished to 
tell everyone, in particular those who were most hostile to the Prophet. In 
after years he used to say: “When I entered Islam that night, I thought to 
myself: Which of the people in Mecca is the most violent in enmity against 
God’s Messenger, that I may go to him and tell him I have become a 
Muslim? My answer was: Abu Jahl. So the next morning I went and 
knocked at his door, and Abu Jahl came out and said: “The best of 
welcomes to my sister’s son! What hath brought thee here?” I answered: “I 
came to tell thee that I believe in God and in His Messenger Muhammad; 
and I testify to the truth of that which he hath brought.” “God curse thee!” 
he said, “and may His curse be on the tidings thou hast brought!” Then he 
slammed the door in my face.” 2 

1 I.1.227. 2 I.1.230. 



XXIX 


The Ban and its 
Annulment 

I T was not tolerable to ‘Umar that Quraysh should worship their gods 
openly at the Ka‘bah, while the believers worshipped God in secret. So 
he used to pray in front of the Ka‘bah and he would encourage other 
Muslims to pray with him. Sometimes he and Hamzah would go with a 
large body of the faithful to the sanctuary, and on such occasions the 
leaders of Quraysh kept away. It would have been a loss of dignity for them 
to stand by and let this happen, yet if they resisted they knew that ‘Umar 
would stop at nothing. They were none the less determined not to allow 
this young man to imagine that he had defeated them, and under pressure 
from Abu Jahl they decided that the best solution would be to place an 
interdiction on the whole clan of Hashim who, with the exception of Abu 
Lahab, were resolved to protect their kinsman whether they believed him 
to be a Prophet or not. A document was drawn up according to which it 
was undertaken that no one would marry a woman of Hashim or give his 
daughter in marriage to a man of Hashim; and no one was to sell anything 
to them, or buy anything from them. This was to continue until the clan of 
Hashim themselves outlawed Muhammad, or until he renounced his claim 
to prophethood. No less than forty leaders of Quraysh set their seal to this 
agreement though not all of them were equally in favour of it, and some of 
them had to be won over. The clan of Muttalib refused to forsake their 
Hashimite cousins, and they were included in the ban. The document was 
solemnly placed inside the Ka‘bah, 

For the sake of mutual security the Bani Hashim gathered round Abu 
Talib in that quarter of the hollow of Mecca where he and most of the clan 
lived. At the arrival of the Prophet and Khadljah with their household, Abu 
Lahab and his wife moved away and went to live in a house which he 
owned elsewhere, to demonstrate their solidarity with Quraysh as a whole. 

The ban was not always rigorously enforced, nor was it possible to close 
all the loopholes owing to the fact that a woman was still a member of her 
own family after marrying into another clan. Abu Jahl was continually on 
the watch, but he could not always impose his will. One day he met 
Khadljah’s nephew Hakim with a slave carrying a bag of flour, and they 
appeared to be making for the dwellings of the Bani Hashim. He accused 
them of taking food to the enemy and threatened to denounce Hakim 



The Ban and its Annulment 89 

before Quraysh. While they were arguing, Abu 1 -Bakhtari, another man of 
Asad, came and asked what was the matter, and when it was explained to 
him he said to Abu Jahl: “It is his aunt’s flour and she hath sent to him for 
it. Let the man go on his way.” Neither Hakim nor Abu 1 -Bakhtari were 
Muslims, but the passing of this bag of flour from one member of the clan 
of Asad to another could concern no one outside that clan. The interfer¬ 
ence of the Makhzumite was outrageous and intolerable; and when Abu 
Jahl persisted Abu 1 -Bakhtari picked up a camel’s jawbone and brought it 
down on his head with such force that he was half stunned and fell to the 
ground, whereupon they trampled him heavily underfoot, to the gratifica¬ 
tion of Hamzah who happened to come by at that moment. 

Hakim was within his rights, but others simplj defied the ban out of 
sympathy for its victims. Hisham ibn ‘Amr of ‘Amir had no Hashimite 
blood, but his family had close marriage connections with the clan; and 
under cover of the night he would often bring a camel laden with food to 
the entrance to Abu Talib’s quarter. Then he would take off its halter and 
strike it a blow on the flank so that it would go past their houses; and 
another night he would load it with clothes and other gifts. 

Apart from such help from unbelievers, the Muslims themselves of the 
other clans, especially Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, contrived various ways of 
thwarting the interdiction. When two years had passed, Abu Bakr could no 
longer be counted as a wealthy man. But despite such help there was 
perpetual shortage of food amongst the two victimised clans, and some¬ 
times the shortage bordered on famine. 

During the sacred months, when they could leave their retreat and go 
about freely without fear of being molested, the Prophet frequently went to 
the Sanctuary, and the leaders of Quraysh took advantage of his presence 
there to insult him and to satirise him. Sometimes when he recited 
Revelations warning Quraysh of what had happened to former peoples, 
Nadr of ‘Abd ad-Dar would rise to his feet and say: “By God, Muhammad 
is no better as a speaker than I am. His talk is but tales of the men of old. 
They have been written out for him even as mine have been written out for 
me.” Then he would tell them tales of Rustum and Isfandiyar and the kings 
of Persia. In this connection was revealed one of the many verses which 
refer to the heart as the faculty by which man has sight of supernatural 
realities. The eye of the heart, though closed in fallen man, is able to take in 
a glimmering of light and this is faith. But an evil way of living causes a 
covering like rust to accumulate over the heart so that it cannot sense 
the Divine origin of God’s Message: When Our Revelations are recited 
unto him, he saith: Tales of the men of old. Nay, but their earnings are 
even as rust over their hearts' As to the opposite state of this, the supreme 
possibility of insight, the Prophet affirmed of himself on more than one 
occasion that the eye of his heart was open even in sleep: “Mine eye 
sleepeth, but my heart is awake.” 2 

Another Revelation, one of the very few that mentions by name any 
contemporary of the Prophet, had now come affirming that Abu Lahab 
and his wife were destined for Hell. 3 Umm Jamil heard of this, and she went 


LXXXIII, 13-14. 


2 1.1. 375; B. XIX, 16, etc. 


3 XCI. 



90 Muhammad 


to the Mosque with a stone pestle in her hand in search of the Prophet, who 
was sitting with Abu Bakr. She came up to Abu Bakr and said to him: 
“Where is thy companion?” He knew that she meant the Prophet who was 
there in front of her, and he was too amazed to speak. “I have heard,” she 
said, “that he hath lampooned me, and by God, if I had found him I would 
have shattered his mouth with this pestle.” Then she said: “As for me, I am 
a poetess indeed,” and she uttered a rhyme about the Prophet: 

“We disobey the reprobate, 

Flout the commands he doth dictate, 

And his religion hate.” 

When she had gone, Abu Bakr asked the Prophet if she had not seen him. 
“She saw me not,” he said. “God took away her sight from me.” As to 
“Reprobate” - in Arabic mudhammam , blamed, the exact opposite of 
muhammad , praised, glorified - some of Quraysh had taken to calling him 
that by way of revilement. He would say to his companions: “Is it not 
wondrous how God turneth away from me the injuries of Quraysh? They 
revile Mudhammam, whereas I am Muhammad.” 1 

The ban on Hashim and Muttalib had lasted two years or more and 
showed no signs of having any of the desired effects. It had moreover the 
undesired and unforeseen effect of drawing further attention to the 
Prophet and of causing the new religion to be talked of more than ever 
throughout Arabia. But independently of these considerations, many of 
Quraysh began to have second thoughts about the ban, especially those 
who had close relatives amongst its victims. The time had come for a 
change of mind to take place, and the first man to act was that same 
Hisham who had so often sent his camel with food and clothes for the 
Hashimites. But he knew that he could achieve nothing by himself, so he 
went to the Makhzumite Zuhayr, one of the two sons of the Prophet’s aunt 
‘Atikah, and said to him: “Art thou content to eat food and wear clothes 
and marry women when thou knowest how it is with thy mother’s 
kinsmen. They can neither buy nor sell, neither marry nor give in marriage; 
and I swear by God that if they were the brethren of the mother of Abu 
1 -Hakam” - he meant Abu Jahl - “and thou hadst called upon him to do 
what he hath called on thee to do, he would never have done it.” 
“Confound thee, Hisham,” said Zuhayr. “What can I do? I am but a single 
man. If I had with me another man, I would not rest until I had annulled 
it.” “I have found a man,” said Hisham. “Who is he?” “Myself.” “Find us 
a third,” said Zuhayr. So Hisham went to Mut‘im ibn ‘Adi, one of the 
leading men of the clan of Nawfal - a grandson of Nawfal himself, brother 
of Hashim and Muttalib." “Is it thy will,” he said, “that two of the sons of 
‘Abdu Manaf should perish whilst thou lookest on in approval of 
Quraysh ? By God, if ye enable them to do this ye will soon find them doing 
the like to you.” Mut‘im asked for a fourth man, so Hisham went to Abu 
1 -BakhtarI of Asad, the man who had struck Abu Jahl on account of 
Khadljah’s bag of flour, and when he asked for a fifth man Hisham went to 


1 I.I.Z 34 - 



The Ban and its Annulment 91 

another Asadite, Zam‘ah ibn al-Aswad, who agreed to be the fifth without 
asking for a sixth. They all undertook to meet that night at the outskirts of 
Hajun, above Mecca, and there they agreed on their plan of action and 
bound themselves not to let drop the matter of the document until they had 
had it annulled. “I am the most nearly concerned,” said Zuhayr, “so I will 
be the first to speak.” 

Early the next day they joined the gathering of the people in the Mosque 
and Zuhayr, clad in a long robe, went round the Ka‘bah seven times. Then 
he turned to face the assembly and said: “O people of Mecca, are we to eat 
food and wear clothes, while the sons of Hashim perish, unable to buy and 
unable to sell? By God, 1 will not be seated until this iniquitous ban be torn 
up.” “Thou liest!” said his cousin Abu Jahl. “It shall not be torn up.” 
“Thou art the better liar,” said ZanTah. “We were not in favour of its 
being written, when it was written.” “ZanTah is right,” said Abu 1 - 
Bakhtarl. “We are not in favour of what is written in it, neither do we hold 
with it.” “Ye are both right,” said Mut‘im, “and he that saith no is a liar. 
We call God to witness our innocence of it and of what is written in it.” 
Hisham said much the same, and when Abu Jahl began to accuse them of 
having plotted it all overnight, Mut‘im cut him short by going into the 
Ka‘bah to fetch the document. He came out in triumph with a small piece 
of vellum in his hand: the worms had eaten the ban, all but the opening 
words “In Thy Name, O God”. 

Most of Quraysh had been virtually won over already, and this unques¬ 
tionable omen was a final and altogether decisive argument. Abu Jahl and 
one or two like-minded men knew that it would be vain to resist. The ban 
was formally revoked, and a body of Quraysh went to give the good news 
to the Bani Hashim and the Bani 1 -Muttalib. 

There was much relief in Mecca after the ban was lifted, and for the 
moment hostilities against the Muslims were relaxed. Exaggerated reports 
of this soon reached Abyssinia, whereupon some of the exiles immediately 
set about making preparations to return to Mecca while others, Ja‘far 
amongst them, decided to remain for a while where they were. 

Meantime the leaders of Quraysh concentrated their efforts on trying to 
persuade the Prophet to agree to a compromise. This was the nearest 
approach they had yet made to him. Walld and other chiefs proposed that 
they should all practise both religions. The Prophet was saved the trouble 
of formulating his refusal by an immediate answer which came directly 
from Heaven in a siirah of six verses: 

Say: O disbelievers, I shall not worship that which ye worship, nor will 
ye worship that which I worship, nor have I worshipped that which ye 
worship, nor have ye worshipped that which I worship. For you your 
religion and for me mine} 

As a result, the momentary good will had already much diminished by the 
time the returning exiles reached the edge of the sacred precinct. 


CIX. 



92 Muhammad 

Except for Ja‘far and ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Jahsh, all the Prophet’s cousins 
returned. With them came also ‘Uthman and Ruqayyah. Another Shamsite 
who returned with ‘Uthman was Abu Hudhayfah. He could rely on his 
father ‘Utbah to protect him. But Abu Salamah and Umm Salamah could 
hope for nothing but persecution from their own clan, so before they 
entered Mecca Abu Salamah sent word to his Hashimite uncle Abu Talib, 
asking for his protection which he agreed to give, much to the indignation 
of Makhzum. “Thou hast protected from us thy nephew Muhammad,” 
they said, “but why art thou protecting our own clansman?” “He is my 
sister’s son,” said Abu Talib. “If I did not protect my sister’s son, I could 
not protect my brother’s son.” They had no choice but to allow him his 
rights of chieftaincy. Moreover, on this occasion Abu Lahab supported his 
brother, and Makhzum knew that he was one of their most powerful allies 
against the Prophet, so they did not wish to offend him. For his part, he 
perhaps regretted having manifested so clearly, at the time of the ban, the 
implacable hatred which he felt for his nephew. Not that his hatred was 
diminished in any sense; but he wished to be on better terms with his family 
for the reason that after his elder brother’s death he might normally hope 
to take his place as chief of the clan; and it may be that he now saw in Abu 
Talib signs that he had not much longer to live. 



XXX 


Paradise and 
Eternity 

A NO THE R returned emigrant who required help against his own 
f\ people was ‘Umar’s brother-in-law, ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un of Jumah, 
JL X. for he knew well that his cousins Umayyah and Ubayy would 
persecute him. This time it was Makhzum who safeguarded a man of 
another clan: Walld himself took ‘Uthman under his protection; but, when 
‘Uthman saw his fellow Muslims being persecuted while he remained safe, 
he went to Walld and renounced his protection. “Son of my brother,” said 
the old man, “hath any of my people harmed thee?” “Not so,” said 
‘Uthman, “but I would have protection of God and I desire not the 
protection of any but Him”. So he went with Walld to the Mosque and 
publicly absolved him of his protection. 

Some days later it happened that the poet Labld was reciting to Quraysh, 
and ‘Uthman was present at the large gathering which had assembled to 
hear him. At a level somewhat higher than that of the general giftedness of 
the Arabs for poetry, there were the many distinctly gifted poets like Abu 
Talib and Hubayrah and Abu Sufyan the son of Harith. But beyond these 
there were the few who were counted as great; and Labld was by common 
consent one of them. He was perhaps the greatest living Arab poet, and 
Quraysh felt privileged to have him amongst them. One of the verses he 
now recited began: 

“Lo, everything save God is naught” 

“Thou hast spoken true,” said ‘Uthman. Labld went on: 

“And all delights away shall vanish.” 

“Thou liest,” exclaimed ‘Uthman. “The delight of Paradise shall never 
vanish.” Labld was not accustomed to being interrupted; as to Quraysh, 
they were not only astonished and outraged but also exceedingly embar¬ 
rassed, for the poet was their guest. “O men of Quraysh,” he said, “they 
who sat with you as friends were never wont to be ill-treated. Since when is 
this?” One of the gathering rose to proffer the tribe’s excuses. “This man is 
but a dolt,” he said, “one of a band of dolts that have left our religion. Let 
not thy soul be moved by what he saith.” ‘Uthman retorted with such 
vehemence that the speaker came and hit him over the eye, so that his brow 
turned green; and Walld, who was sitting nearby, remarked to him that his 
eye need never have suffered if he had remained under his protection. 



94 Muhammad 


“Nay,” said ‘Uthman, “my good eye is indeed a pauper for want of what 
hath befallen her sister in the way of God. I am under His protection who is 
mightier and more determining than thou.” “Come, son of my brother,” 
said Walld, “renew thy pact with me.” But ‘Uthman declined. 

The Prophet was not present at the gathering. But he heard of the poem 
of Labld and of what had ensued. His only recorded comment was: “The 
truest word that poet ever spake is: “Lo, everything save God is naught.” 1 
He did not blame Labid for the words which immediately followed. The 
poet could be credited with meaning that “all earthly delights away shall 
vanish”; and on the other hand, all Paradises and Delights which are 
Eternal can be thought of as included in God or in the Face of God. There 
had come, about this time, the Revelation: Everything perisheth hut His 
Face 1 and in an earlier Revelation are the words: Eternal is the Face of thy 
Lord in Its Majesty and Bounty? Where this Eternal Bounty is, there its 
recipients must be, and also their delights. 

There now came a more explicit Revelation which contained the 
following passage. The first verse refers to the Judgement: On the day 
when it cometh no soul shall speak hut hy His leave, wretched some, and 
others blissful. As for the wretched, in the Fire shall they be, to sigh and to 
wail is their portion, abiding therein as long as heaven and earth endure, 
except as God will. Verily thy Lord is ever the doer of what He will. And as 
for the blissful, in the Garden shall they be, abiding therein as long as 
heaven and earth endure, except as God will - a gift that shall not be taken 
away. 4 

The closing words show that it is not the Divine Will that the gift of 
Paradise to man after the Judgement shall be taken away from him as was 
his first Paradise. Other questions relating to this passage were answered 
by the Prophet himself, who continually spoke to his followers about the 
Resurrection, the Judgement, Hell and Paradise. On one occasion he said: 
“God, who bringeth whom He will into His Mercy, shall enter into 
Paradise the people of Paradise, and into Hell the people of Hell. Then will 
He say (to the Angels): ‘Look for him in whose heart ye can find faith of the 
weight of a grain of mustard seed, and take him out of Hell’. .. Then they 
will take out a multitude of mankind and will say: ‘Our Lord, we have left 
therein not one of those whereof Thou didst command us’, and He will 
say: ‘Return and take out him in whose heart ye find an atom’s weight of 
good.’ Then will they take out a multitude of mankind and will say: ‘Our 
Lord, no goodness have we left therein.’ Then will the Angels intercede, 
and the Prophets and the believers. Then will God say: ‘The angels have 
interceded, and the prophets have interceded, and the believers have 
interceded. There remaineth only the intercession of the Most Merciful of 
the merciful.’ And He will take out from the fire those who did no good and 
will cast them into a river at the entrance to Paradise which is called the 
River of Life.” 5 

And of those in Paradise the Prophet said: “God will say to the people of 
Paradise: ‘Are ye well pleased?’ and they will say: ‘How should we not be 

1 B.LXIII,2 6 . 1 XXVIII, 88. 3 LV, 27. 

4 XI, 105-8. 5 M. 1,79; B. XCVII, 24. 



Paradise and Eternity 9 5 

well pleased, O Lord, inasmuch Thou hast given us that which Thou hast 
not given to any of thy creatures else?’ Then will He say: ‘Shall I not give 
you better than that?’, and they will say: ‘What thing, O Lord, is better?’ 
and He will say: ‘I will let down upon you My Ridwan .” 71 The ultimate 
beatitude of Ridwan , sometimes translated “Good Pleasure”, is inter¬ 
preted to mean God’s final and absolute acceptance of a soul and His 
taking of that soul to Himself and His Eternal Good Pleasure therein. 
This supreme Paradise must not be taken as excluding what is known as 
Paradise in the usual sense, since the Koran promises that for each blessed 
soul there will be two Paradises, 2 and in speaking of his own state in the 
Hereafter the Prophet likewise spoke of it as a twofold blessing, “the 
meeting with my Lord, and Paradise”. 3 

1 M. LI, z. 2 LV, 4 6 . 3 LI. 1000. 



XXXI 


The Year of 
Sadness 

I N the year ad 619, not long after the annulment of the ban, the Prophet 
suffered a great loss in the death of his wife Khadljah. She was about 
sixty-five years old and he was nearing fifty. They had lived together in 
profound harmony for twenty-five years, and she had been not only his 
wife but also his intimate friend, his wise counsellor, and mother to his 
whole household including ‘All and Zayd. His four daughters were 
overcome with grief, but he was able to comfort them by telling them that 
Gabriel had once come to him and told him to give Khadljah greetings of 
Peace from her Lord and to tell her that He had prepared for her an abode 
in Paradise. 

Another loss followed closely upon the death of Khadljah, a loss less 
great and less penetrating in itself, but at the same time less consolable and 
more serious in its outward consequences. Abu Talib fell ill, and it soon 
became clear that he was dying. On his deathbed he was visited by a group 
of the leaders of Quraysh - ‘Utbah and Shaybah and Abu Sufyan of ‘Abdu 
Shams, Ujnayyah of Jumah, Abu Jahl of Makhzum and others - and they 
said to him: “Abu Talib, thou knowest the esteem we have for thee; and 
now this that thou seest hath come upon thee, and we fear for thee. Thou 
knowest what is between us and thy brother’s son. So call him to thee, and 
take for him a gift from us, and take for us a gift from him, that he should 
let us be, and we will let him be. Let him leave us and our religion in peace.” 
So Abu Talib sent to him, and when he came he said to him: “Son of my 
brother, these nobles of thy people have come together on account of thee, 
to give and to take.” “So be it,” said the Prophet. “Give me one word - a 
word by which ye shall rule over the Arabs, and the Persians shall be your 
subjects.” “Yea, by thy father,” said Abu Jahl, “for that we will give thee 
one word, and ten words more.” “Ye must say,” said the Prophet, “there is 
no god but God , and ye must renounce what ye worship apart from Him.” 
They clapped their hands and said: “Wouldst thou, O Muhammad, make 
the gods one god? Thy bidding is strange indeed!” Then they said to each 
other: “This man will give you nothing of what ye ask, so go your ways and 
keep to the religion of your fathers until God judge between you and him.” 

When they had gone, Abu Talib said to the Prophet: “Son of my brother, 
thou didst not, as I saw it, ask of them anything out of the way.” These 



The Year of Sadness 97 

words filled the Prophet with longing that he should enter Islam. “Uncle,” 
he said, “say thou the words, that through them I may intercede for thee on 
the day of the Resurrection.” “Son of my brother,” he said, “if I did not 
fear that Quraysh would think I had but said the words in dread of death, 
then would I say them. Yet would my saying them be but to please thee.” 
Then, when death drew near to Abu Talib, ‘Abbas saw him moving his lips 
and he put his ear close to him and listened and then he said: “My brother 
hath spoken the words thou didst bid him speak.” But the Prophet said: “I 
heard him not.” 

It was now becoming difficult in Mecca for almost all those who had no 
official protection. Before he joined the Prophet Abu Bakr had been a man 
of considerable influence, but unlike ‘Umar and Hamzah, he was not a 
dangerous man in himself and therefore did not inspire fear except in those 
who had learned to esteem him for spiritual reasons; and when his Islam 
set a barrier between himself and the leaders of Quraysh his influence with 
them decreased almost to nothing, just as it increased within the commun¬ 
ity of the new religion. For Abu Bakr the situation was, moreover, 
aggravated by his being known to be responsible for many conversions; 
and it may have been partly in revenge for the Islam of Aswad the son of 
Nawfal that one day Nawfal himself, Khadljah’s half-brother, organised 
an attack on Abu Bakr and Talhah, who were left lying in the public 
highway, bound hand and foot and roped together. Nor did any of the men 
of Taym intervene against the men of Asad, which suggests that they had 
disowned their two leading Muslim clansmen. 

There may have been other incidents also. Abu Bakr was on increasingly 
bad terms with Bilal’s former master Umayyah, the chief of Jumah, 
amongst whom he lived; and the time came when he felt he had no 
alternative but to emigrate. Having obtained permission of the Prophet, he 
set out to join those who had remained in Abyssinia. But before he had 
reached the Red Sea, he was met by Ibn ad-Dughunnah, at that time the 
head of a small group of confederate tribes not far from Mecca, allies of 
Quraysh. This Bedouin chief had known Abu Bakr well in his days of 
affluence and influence, yet now he had the appearance of a wandering 
hermit. Amazed at the change, he questioned him. “My people have 
ill-treated me,” said Abu Bakr, “and driven me out, and all I seek is to 
travel over the face of the earth, worshipping God.” “Why have they done 
this?” said Ibn ad-Dughunnah. “Thou art as an ornament to thy clan, a 
help in misfortune, a doer of right, ever fulfilling the needs of others. 
Return, for thou art beneath my protection.” So he took him back to 
Mecca and spoke to the people, saying: “Men of Quraysh, I have given my 
protection to the son of Abu Quhafah, so let no one treat him other than 
well.” Quraysh confirmed the protection and promised that Abu Bakr 
should be safe, but at the instigation of the Bani Jumah they said to his 
protector: “Tell him to worship his Lord within doors, and to pray and 
recite what he will there, but tell him not to cause us trouble by letting it be 
seen and heard, for his appearance is striking and he hath with him a way, 
so that we fear lest he seduce our sons and our women.” Ibn ad- 
Dughunnah told this to Abu Bakr, and for a while he prayed only in his 



98 Muhammad 


house and made there his recitations of the Koran; and for a while the 
tension was relaxed between him and the leaders of the Bani Jumah. Abu 
Talib was succeeded by Abu Lahab as chief of Hashim; but the protection 
that Abu Lahab gave his nephew was merely nominal, and the Prophet was 
ill-treated as never before. On one occasion a passer-by leaned over his 
gate and tossed a piece of putrifying offal into his cooking pot; and once 
when he was praying in the courtyard of his house, a man threw over him a 
sheep’s uterus filthy with blood and excrement. Before disposing of it, the 
Prophet picked up the object on the end of a stick and said, standing at his 
gate: “O sons of ‘Abdu Manaf, what protection is this?” He had seen that 
the offender was the Shamsite ‘Uqbah, 1 stepfather of ‘Uthman, Ru- 
qayyah’s husband. On another occasion, when the Prophet was coming 
from the Ka‘bah, a man took a handful of dirt and threw it in his face and 
over his head. When he returned home one of his daughters washed him 
clean of it, weeping the while. “Weep not, little daughter,” he said, “God 
will protect thy father.” 

It was then that he decided to seek help from Thaqlf, the people of Ta’if 
- a decision which eloquently reflected the apparent gravity of his situation 
in Mecca. For except that truth can conquer all things, what indeed could 
be hoped for from Thaqlf, the guardians of the temple of the goddess 
al-Lat, whose shrine they liked to think of as comparable to the House of 
God? There must however be exceptions in Ta’if as there were in Mecca, 
and the Prophet was not without hope as he rode up from the desert 
towards the welcoming orchards and gardens and cornfields which were 
the outskirts of the walled city. On his arrival he went straight to the house 
of three brothers who were the leaders of Thaqlf at that time, the sons of 
‘Amr ibn Umayyah, the man whom Walid looked on as his own counter¬ 
part in Ta’if, the second of “the two great men of the two townships”. But 
when the Prophet asked them to accept Islam and help him against his 
opponents, one of them immediately said: “If God sent thee, I will tear 
down the hangings of the Ka‘bah!”, and another said: “Could God find 
none but thee to send?” As for the third, he said: “Let me never speak to 
thee! For if thou art a Messenger from God as thou sayest, then art thou 
too great a personage for me to address; and if thou liest, it is not fitting 
that I should speak to thee.” So the Prophet rose to leave them, perhaps 
intending to try elsewhere in Ta’if; but when he had left them, they stirred 
up their slaves and retainers to insult him and shout at him, until a crowd 
of people were gathered together against him and he was forced to take 
refuge in a private orchard. Once he had entered it the crowd began to 
disperse, and, tethering his camel to a palm tree, he made for the shelter of 
a vine and sat in its shade. 

When he felt himself to be in safety and at peace, he prayed: “O God, 
unto Thee do I complain of my weakness, of my helplessness, and of my 
lowliness before men. O Most Merciful of the merciful, Thou art Lord of 
the weak. And Thou art my Lord. Into whose hands wilt Thou entrust me ? 
Unto some far off stranger who will ill-treat me? Or unto a foe whom Thou 


1 He was the second husband of ‘Uthman’s mother Arwa, the Prophet’s cousin, named 
after their aunt Arwa, the mother of Tulayb. 



The Year of Sadness 99 

hast empowered against me? I care not, so Thou be not wroth with me. But 
Thy favouring help - that were for me the broader way and the wider 
scope! I take refuge in the Light of Thy Countenance whereby all dark¬ 
nesses are illuminated and the things of this world and the next are rightly 
ordered, lest Thou make descend Thine anger upon me, or lest Thy wrath 
beset me. Yet is it Thine to reproach until Thou art well pleased. There is 
no power and no might except through Thee.” 1 

The place where the Prophet had found peace was not as empty as it had 
seemed. Every man of Quraysh hoped for riches enough to buy a garden 
and a house on the green hill of Ta’if to which he might escape when the 
heat of Mecca was at its fiercest, and this orchard was not owned by a man 
of Thaqlf but was part of a property that belonged to the Shamsite leaders 
‘Utbah and Shaybah, who were even now seated in a corner of their garden 
adjoining the vineyard. They had seen what had happened, nor were they 
without feelings of indignation at the way in which the rabble of Thaqlf 
had ventured to treat a man of Quraysh, who was, moreover, like 
themselves, of the sons of ‘Abdu Manaf. As to the differences which had 
come between them, were not these now almost at an end? They had last 
seen Muhammad at the deathbed of Abu Talib; and now he was without a 
protector, and clearly in desperate straits. Feeling they could afford to be 
generous, they called a young Christian slave of theirs named ‘Addas, and 
said to him: “Take a cluster of these grapes and put them on this platter. 
Then give it to that man, and bid him eat thereof.” ‘Addas did as they had 
ordered, and when the Prophet put his hand to the grapes he said: “In the 
name of God.” ‘Addas looked keenly into his face; then he said: “Those 
words are not what the people of this country say.” “From what country 
art thou?” said the Prophet. “And what is thy religion?” “I am a 
Christian,” he said, “of the people of Nineveh.” “From the city of the 
righteous man Jonah, the son of Matta,” said the Prophet. “How knowest 
thou aught of Jonah the son of Matta?” said ‘Addas. “He is my brother,” 
was the answer. “He was a Prophet, and I am a Prophet.” Then ‘Addas 
bent over him and kissed his head and his hands and his feet. 

When they saw this, the two brothers exclaimed, each to the other, as if 
with one voice: “So much for thy slave! Already hath he been corrupted!” 
And when ‘Addas came back to them, leaving the Prophet to eat in peace, 
they said: “Out upon thee, ‘Addas! What made thee kiss that man’s head 
and his hands and his feet?” He answered: “Master, there is nothing on 
earth better than this man. He hath told me of things that only a Prophet 
could know.” “Out upon thee, ‘Addas!” they said. “Let him not seduce 
thee from thy religion, for thy religion is better than his.” 

The Prophet left Ta’if and started on his way towards Mecca when he 
saw that no good was to be gained at this juncture from the tribe of Thaqlf. 
Late that night he reached the valley of Nakhlah, the half-way halt 
between the two townships which had rejected him. At the moment of his 
sharpest consciousness of this rejection, his prophethood had been ac¬ 
knowledged by a man from far-off Nineveh; and now, while he was 
standing in prayer at Nakhlah, a company of the jinn passed by - seven 


I.I. 280. 



ioo Muhammad 


jinn from Naslbln - and they stopped spellbound by the words he was 
reciting from the Koran. The Prophet knew that he had not been sent to the 
world of men only. The Revelation had recently affirmed: We sent thee not 
save as a mercy for the worlds ; 1 and one of the earlier Surahs 2 is addressed 
to the jinn as well as to men, warning them both of Hell as a punishment 
for evil and promising Paradise to both as a reward for piety. There now 
came the Revelation: Say: it hath been revealed unto me that a company of 
the jinn gave ear, and then said: Verily we have heard a wondrous 
recitation which guideth unto rightness, and we believe in it . 1 And another 
Revelation 4 told how the jinn thereupon returned to their community and 
urged them to respond to God’s summoner, as they called the Prophet. 

The Prophet was unwilling to return to the same conditions which only 
two days previously had impelled him to leave his home. But if he had a 
protector, he could continue to fulfil his mission. The Bani Hashim had 
failed him, so his thoughts turned to his mother’s clan. The situation there 
was abnormal, for by far the most outstanding and influential man of 
Zuhrah was Akhnas ibn Shariq, who was not strictly speaking a member 
of the clan, nor even of Quraysh. He was in fact of Thaqlf, but he had long 
been a confederate of Zuhrah, and they had come to consider him as their 
chief. The Prophet had already decided to ask for his help, when he was 
overtaken by a horseman also on his way to Mecca but travelling faster 
than himself, so he asked him to do him the favour of going, on his arrival, 
to Akhnas and of saying to him: “Muhammad saith: Wilt thou give me thy 
protection, that I may deliver the message of my Lord?” The horseman was 
well disposed, and even undertook to return with the answer, which 
proved to be negative, for Akhnas simply remarked that a confederate had 
no power to speak in the name of the clan with which he was federated and 
to grant a protection which would be binding upon them. The Prophet, 
who was by this time not far from Mecca, now sent the same request to 
Suhayl. His reply was equally disappointing, though the reason he ad¬ 
vanced for his refusal had nothing to do with his opposition to Islam. It 
was once more a question of tribal principle. In the Hollow of Mecca his 
clan was distinct from all the rest as being descended from ‘Amir the son of 
Lu’ayy, 5 whereas the others were all descended from ‘Amir’s brother Ka‘b. 
Suhayl simply replied that the sons of ‘Amir do not give protection against 
the sons of Ka‘b. The Prophet now turned aside from the way that led to 
the city, and took refuge in the cave of Mount Hira’ where he had received 
the first Revelation. From there he sent his petition to a leader more closely 
related to himself, Mut‘im, the chief of Nawfal, one of the five who had 
organised the annulment of the ban, and Mut‘im immediately agreed. “Let 
him enter the city,” he sent back word; and the next morning, fully armed, 
together with his sons and his nephews, he escorted the Prophet to the 
Ka‘bah. Abu Jahl asked them if they had become followers of Mu¬ 
hammad. “We are giving him protection,” they replied; and the Makhzu- 
mite could only say: “Whom ye protect, to him we give protection.” 


1 XXI, 107. 2 LV. 3 LXXII, 1-2. 4 XLVI, 30—1. 

s See the genealogical tree, p. 3 47. 



XXXII 


“The Light of 
Thy Countenance” 

F ATIMAH, the widow of Abu Talib, had entered Islam, either before 
or after her husband’s death, and so had her daughter Umm Hani’, 
the sister of ‘All and Ja‘far; but Umm Hani”s husband Hubayrah 
was altogether impervious to the message of God’s Oneness. He none the 
less made the Prophet welcome when he came to their house, and if it was 
the time for a prayer during one of these visits the Muslims of the 
household would pray together. On one occasion, when they had all 
prayed the night prayer behind the Prophet, Umm Hani’ invited him to 
spend the night with them. He accepted her invitation; but after a brief 
sleep he rose and went to the Mosque, for he loved to visit the Ka‘bah 
during the night hours. While he was there, the desire to sleep came over 
him again, and he lay down in the Hijr. 

“Whilst I was sleeping in the Hijr,” he said, “Gabriel came to me and 
spurred me with his foot whereupon I sat upright, yet I saw nothing and lay 
down once again. A second time he came; and a third time, and then he 
took me by the arm and I rose and stood beside him, and he led me out to 
the gate of the Mosque, and there was a white beast, between a mule and 
an ass, with wings at his sides wherewith he moved his legs; and his every 
stride was as far as his eye could see.” 1 

The Prophet then told how he mounted Buraq, for so the beast was 
named; and with the Archangel at his side, pointing the way and measur¬ 
ing his pace to that of the heavenly steed, they sped northwards beyond 
Yathrib and beyond Khaybar, until they reached Jerusalem. Then they 
were met by a company of Prophets — Abraham, Moses, Jesus and others - 
and when he prayed on the site of the Temple, they gathered together 
behind him in prayer. Then two vessels were brought before him and 
offered him, one of wine the other of milk. He took the vessel of milk and 
drank from it, but left the vessel of wine, and Gabriel said: “Thou hast 
been guided unto the path primordial, and hast guided thereunto thy 
people, O Muhammad, and wine is forbidden you.” 

Then, as had happened to others before him — to Enoch and Elijah and 
Jesus and Mary - Muhammad was taken up out of this life to Heaven. 


1 1.1. 264. 



102 Muhammad 


From the rock in the centre of the site of the Temple he again mounted 
Buraq, who moved his wings in upward flight and became for his rider as 
the chariot of fire had been for Elijah. Led by the Archangel, who now 
revealed himself as a heavenly being, they ascended beyond the domain of 
earthly space and time and bodily forms, and as they passed through the 
seven Heavens he met again those Prophets with whom he had prayed in 
Jerusalem; But there they had appeared to him as they had been during 
their life on earth, whereas now he saw them in their celestial reality, even 
as they now saw him, and he marvelled at their transfiguration. Of Joseph 
he said that his face had the splendour of the moon at its full, 1 and that he 
had been endowed with no less than the half of all existing beauty. 2 Yet this 
did not diminish Muhammad’s wonderment at his other brethren, and he 
mentioned in particular the great beauty of Aaron. 3 Of the Gardens that he 
visited in the different Heavens he said afterwards: “A piece of Paradise the 
size of a bow is better than all beneath the sun, whereon it riseth and 
setteth; and if a woman of the people of Paradise appeared unto the people 
of earth, she would fill the space between Heaven and here below with light 
and with fragrance.” 4 Everything he now saw, he saw with the eye of the 
Spirit; and of his spiritual nature, with reference to the beginnings of all 
earthly nature, he said: “I was a Prophet when Adam was yet between 
water and clay.” 3 

The summit of his ascent was the Lote Tree of the Uttermost End. So it is 
named in the Koran, and, in one of the oldest commentaries, based on the 
sayings of the Prophet, it is said: “The Lote Tree is rooted in the Throne, 
and it marks the end of the knowledge of every knower, be he Archangel or 
Prophet-Messenger. All beyond it is a hidden mystery, unknown to any 
save God Alone.” 6 At this summit of the universe Gabriel appeared to him 
in all his archangelic splendour, even as he was first created. 7 Then, in the 
words of the Revelation: When there enshrouded the Lote Tree that which 
enshroudeth, the eye wavered not nor did it transgress. Verily he beheld, of 
all the signs of his Lord , the greatest . 8 According to the commentary, the 
Divine Light descended upon the Lote Tree and enshrouded it and all else 
beside, and the eye of the Prophet beheld it without wavering and without 
turning aside from it. 9 Such was the answer — or one of the answers — to 
the supplication implicit in his words: “I take refuge in the Light of Thy 
Countenance.” 

At the Lote Tree the Prophet received for his people the command of fifty 
prayers a day; and it was then 10 that he received the Revelation which 
contains the creed of Islam: The messenger believeth, and the faithful 
believe, in what hath been revealed unto him from his Lord. Each one 
believeth in God and His angels and His books and His messengers: we 
made no distinction between any of His messengers. And they say: we hear 
and we obey; grant us. Thou our Lord, Thy forgiveness; unto Thee is the 
ultimate becoming 11 

They made their descent through the seven Heavens even as they had 

1 I.I.270. 2 A.H. Ill, 286. J I.I.270. 4 B.L.VI , 6 . 

5 Tir. XLVI, 1; A.H. IV, 66 . 6 Tab., Tafstr, LI 1 L 

7 M. I, 280; B. LIX, 7. 8 LII, i6_i8. 

9 Tab., Tafstr, LIII. 10 M. I, 280. 11 11,285. 



“The Light of Thy Countenance” 103 


ascended. The Prophet said: “On my return, when I passed Moses - and 
what a good friend he was unto you! - he asked me: ‘How many prayers 
have been laid upon thee?’ I told him fifty prayers every day and he said: 
‘The congregational prayer is a weighty thing, and thy people are weak. 
Return unto thy Lord, and ask Him to lighten the load for thee and thy 
people.’ So I returned and asked my Lord to make it lighter, and He took 
away ten. Then I passed Moses again, and he repeated what he had said 
before, so I returned again, and ten more prayers were taken from me. But 
every time I returned unto Moses he sent me back until finally all the 
prayers had been taken from me except five for each day and night. Then I 
returned unto Moses, but still he said the same as before; and I said: ‘I 
have returned unto my Lord and asked Him until I am ashamed. I will not 
go again.’ And so it is that he who performeth the five in good faith and in 
trust of God’s bounty, unto him shall be given the meed of fifty prayers.” 1 

When the Prophet and the Archangel had made their descent to the Rock 
at Jerusalem, they returned to Mecca the way they had come, overtaking 
many southbound caravans. It was still night when they reached the 
Ka‘bah. From there the Prophet went again to the house of his cousin. In 
her words: “A little before dawn the Prophet woke us, and when we had 
prayed the dawn prayer, he said: ‘O Umm Hani’, I prayed with you the last 
evening prayer in this valley as thou sawest. Then went I to Jerusalem and 
there prayed; and now have I prayed with you the morning prayer as thou 
seest.’ He rose to go, and I seized his robe wth such force that it came away, 
laying bare his belly, as if it had been but cotton cloth draped round him. 
‘O Prophet of God,’ I said. ‘Tell not the people this, for they will give thee 
the lie and insult thee.’ ‘By God, I will tell them,’ he said.” 2 

He went to the Mosque and told those whom he met there of his journey 
to Jerusalem. His enemies were immediately triumphant, for they now felt 
they had an irrefutable cause for mockery. Every child of Quraysh knew 
that a caravan takes a month to go from Mecca to Syria and a month to 
return. And now Muhammad claimed to have gone there and back in one 
night. A group of men went to Abu Bakr and said: “What thinkest thou 
now of thy friend ? He telleth us he went last night to Jerusalem and prayed 
there and then returned to Mecca.” Abu Bakr accused them of lying, but 
they assured him that Muhammad was in the Mosque at that moment, 
speaking about this journey. “If so he saith,” said Abu Bakr, “then it is 
true. And where is the wonder of it? He telleth me that tidings come to him 
from Heaven to earth in one hour of the day or night, and I know him to be 
speaking the truth. And that is beyond what ye cavil at.” 3 He then went to 
the Mosque to repeat his confirmation “If so he saith, then it is true,” and it 
was for this that the Prophet gave him the name as-Siddtq , which means 
“the great witness of truth” or “the great confirmer of the truth”. 
Moreover, some of those who had found the story incredible began to have 
second thoughts, for the Prophet described the caravans he had overtaken 
on the way home and said where they were and about when they might be 
expected to arrive in Mecca; and each arrived as predicted, and the details 
were as he had described. To those in the Mosque he spoke only of his 

1 I.I.271. 2 1.1.267. 3 I.I.265. 



104 Muhammad 

journey to Jerusalem, but when he was alone with Abu Bakr and others of 
his Companions he told them of his ascent through the seven Heavens, 
telling them a part of what he had seen, with more to be recounted later 
over the years, often in answer to questions. 



XXXIII 


After the Year of 
Sadness 

I N the year which followed the Year of Sadness, the Pilgrimage fell at 
the beginning of June; and on the Feast of the Sacrifices the Prophet 
went to the valley of Mina where the pilgrims camp for three days. It 
had been his practice now for several years to visit the various groups of 
tents and to declare his message to any who would listen, reciting for them 
such verses of the Revelations as he felt moved to recite. The nearest point 
of Mina to Mecca is ‘Aqabah, where the road rises up steeply from the 
valley towards the hills in the direction of the holy city: and it was this year 
at ‘Aqabah that he came upon six men of the tribe of Khazraj, from 
Yathrib. He did not know any of the six, but they had all heard of him and 
of his claim to prophethood, and as soon as he told them who he was their 
faces lit up with interest, and they listened to him attentively. Every man of 
them was familiar with the threat of their neighbours, the Yathrib Jews: 
“A Prophet is now about to be sent. We will follow him and we will slay 
you as ‘Ad and Tram were slain”; and when the Prophet had finished 
speaking, they said to each other: “This is indeed the Prophet that the Jews 
promised us would come. Let them not be the first to reach him!” Then, 
after one or two questions had been asked and answered, each of the six 
men testified to the truth of the Prophet’s message and promised to fulfil 
the conditions of Islam which he laid before them. “We have left our 
people,” they said, “for there is no people so torn asunder by enmity and 
evil as they; and it may be that God will unite them through thee. We will 
now go to them and summon them to accept thy religion even as we have 
accepted it; and if God gather them together about thee, then no man will 
be mightier than thou.” 1 

The Prophet continued to visit Abu Bakr regularly at his house amongst 
the dwellings of the Bani Jumah. These visits were a memorable feature of 
the childhood of ‘A’ishah, Abu Bakr’s younger daughter. She could not 
remember a time when her father and mother were not Muslims, and when 
the Prophet was not a daily visitor to them. 

During this same year that followed KhadTjah’s death, the Prophet 


LI. 287. 



io6 Muhammad 


dreamed that he saw a man who was carrying someone wrapped in a piece 
of silk. The man said to him: “This is thy wife, so uncover her.” The 
Prophet lifted the silk and there was ‘A’ishah. But ‘A’ishah was only six 
years old, and he had passed his fiftieth year. Moreover Abu Bakr had 
promised her to Mut‘im for his son Jubayr. The Prophet simply said to 
himself: “If this be from God, He will bring it to pass.” 1 A few nights later 
he saw in his sleep an Angel carrying the same bundle of silk, and this time 
it was he who said to the Angel: “Show me.” The Angel lifted the silk and 
there, again, was ‘A’ishah, and again the Prophet said: “If this be from 
God, He will bring it to pass.” 2 

As yet he mentioned these dreams to no one, not even to Abu Bakr. But 
now there came a third confirmation, of a different kind. Khawlah, the 
wife of ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un, had been very attentive to the various needs 
of the Prophet’s household ever since Khadljah’s death; and one day when 
she was in his house she suggested to him that he should take another wife. 
When he asked her whom he should marry, she said: “Either ‘A’ishah the 
daughter of Abu Bakr or Sawdah the daughter of Zam‘ah.” Sawdah, the 
cousin and sister-in-law of Suhayl, 3 was now a widow, aged about thirty. 
Her first husband, Sakran, Suhayl’s brother, had taken her with him to 
Abyssinia, and they had been among the first to return to Mecca. Not long 
after their return Sakran had died. 

The Prophet told Khawlah to seek to arrange his marriages to both the 
brides she had suggested. Sawdah’s answer was: “I am at thy service, O 
Messenger of God,” and the Prophet sent back word saying: “Bid a man of 
thy people give thee in marriage.” She chose her brother-in-law Hatib, 
who by this time had also returned from Abyssinia, and he gave her in 
marriage to the Prophet. 

Meantime Abu Bakr approached Mut‘im, who was persuaded without 
difficulty to forgo the marriage of ‘A’ishah to his son; and, some months 
after the marriage of Sawdah, ‘A’ishah also became the Prophet’s wife, 
through a marriage contracted by him and her father, at which she herself 
was not present. She said afterwards that she had had her first inkling of 
her new status when one day she was playing with her friends outside, not 
far from their house, and her mother came and took her by the hand and 
led her indoors, telling her that henceforth she must not go out to play, and 
that her friends must come to her instead. ‘A’ishah dimly guessed the 
reason, though her mother did not immediately tell her that she was 
married; and apart from having to play in their courtyard instead of in 
the road, her life continued as before. 

About this time Abu Bakr decided to have a small mosque built in front 
of his house. It was surrounded by walls, but open to the sky, and there he 
would pray and recite the Koran. But the walls were not high enough to 
prevent passers-by from looking over them, and often a number of people 
would stand there and listen to his recitation, while at the same time they 
would see something of his reverence for the revealed Book, which moved 
him to the depth of his being. Umayy ah now feared that the number of Abu 
Bakr’s converts would be still further increased, and at his instance the 

1 B. XCI, 20. 2 ibid. 3 Seep. 72ff. 



After the Year of Sadness 107 

leaders of Quraysh sent a deputation to Ibn ad-Dughunnah, reminding 
him of what they had said at the outset of his protection, and pointing out 
that the walls of Abu Bakr’s mosque were not sufficient to make it part of 
his house. “If he will worship his Lord within doors, then let him do so,” 
they said, “yet if he must needs do it openly, then bid him absolve thee of 
thy protection of him.” But Abu Bakr refused to give up his mosque, and he 
formally absolved Ibn ad-Dughunnah of his pact, saying: “I am content 
with the protection of God.” 

It was on that very day that the Prophet announced to him and to others 
of his Companions: “I have been shown the place of your emigration: I 
saw a well watered land, rich in date palms, between two tracts of black 
stones.” 1 


1 B. XXXVII 7. 



XXXIV 

Yathrib Responsive 

I lORN asunder by enmity and evil.” In so describing their 
I people, the six recent converts of Yathrib had not exaggerated. 

JL The battle of Bu‘ath, the fourth and most savage conflict of the 
civil war, had not been altogether decisive; nor had it been followed by any 
peace worthy of the name but merely by an agreement to stop fighting for 
the moment. The dangerously prolonged state of chronic bitterness 
fraught with an increasing number of incidents of violence had won over 
many of the more moderate men of both sides to the opinion that they 
needed an overall chief who would unite them as Qusayy had united 
Quraysh, and that there was no other solution to their problem. One of the 
leading men of the oasis, ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy, was favoured by many as a 
possible king. He had not fought against Aws in the recent conflict but had 
withdrawn his men on the eve of the battle. He was none the less of 
Khazraj; and it was exceedingly doubtful whether Aws would be capable 
of accepting a king who was not of their tribe. 

The six men of Khazraj delivered the message of Islam to as many of 
their people as would listen to them; and the next summer, that is, in ad 
621, five of them repeated their Pilgrimage, bringing with them seven 
others, two of whom were of Aws. At ‘Aqabah, these twelve men pledged 
themselves to the Prophet, and this pledge is known as the First ‘Aqabah. 
In the words of one of them: “We pledged our allegiance to the Messenger 
of God on the night of the First ‘Aqabah, that we would associate nothing 
with God, that we would neither steal, not commit fornication, nor slay 
our offspring 1 nor utter slanders; and that we would not disobey him in 
that which was right. And he said to us: ‘If ye fulfil this pledge, then 
Paradise is yours; and if ye commit one of these sins and then receive 
punishment for it in this world, that shall serve as expiation. And if ye 
conceal it until the Day of the Resurrection, then it is for God to punish or 
forgive, even as He will.* ” 2 

When they left for Yathrib the Prophet sent with them Mus‘ab of ‘Abd 
ad-Dar who had by that time returned from Abyssinia. He was to recite the 
Koran to them and give them religious instruction. He lodged with As‘ad 
ibn Zurarah, one of the six who had entered Islam the previous year. 
Mus‘ab had also to lead the prayer because, despite their Islam, neither 
Aws nor Khazraj could yet endure to give one another that precedence. 

1 In reference to the practice which had developed in Arabia among the indigent 
Bedouin, especially in time of famine, of burying unwanted female infants. 

2 I.I.289. 



Yathrib Responsive 109 

The rivalry between the descendants of the two sons of Qaylah was of 
long standing. There had been none the less frequent intermarriages 
between the two tribes, and as a result of one of these, As‘ad, the Khazrajite 
host of Mus‘ab, was the first cousin of Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh, chief of one of the 
clans of Aws. Sa‘d strongly disapproved of the new religion. He was 
therefore angry, yet at the same time embarrassed, to see his cousin As‘ad 
together with Mus‘ab and some newly converted Muslims sitting one day 
in a garden in the midst of his people’s territory, in earnest conversation 
with members of his clan. Determined to put an end to such activities, yet 
not wishing to be involved in any unpleasantness himself, he went to Usayd 
who was next in authority to himself, and said: “Go thou to these two men 
who have come to our quarters to make fools of our weaker brethren”—he 
was no doubt thinking of his younger brother, the now dead Iyas, who had 
been the first man of Yathrib to enter Islam 1 - “and drive them out; and 
forbid them to come to our quarters again. If As‘ad were not my kinsman I 
would save thee this trouble but he is my mother’s sister’s son, and I can do 
nothing against him.” Usayd took his lance and went and stood over them 
and said, with as fierce an expression as he could muster: “What bringeth 
the two of you here, to make fools of our weaker brethren? Leave us, if ye 
have any care for your lives.” Mus‘ab looked at him and said gently: “Why 
not be seated and hear what I have to say? Then, if it please thee, accept it; 
and if not, keep thyself clear of it.” “That is fairly spoken,” said Usayd, 
who liked both the appearance and the manner of the Prophet’s envoy; 
and striking his lance in the ground he sat down beside them. Mus‘ab 
spoke to him about Islam and recited the Koran to him; and Usayd’s 
expression changed, so that those who were present could see Islam in his 
face from the light that shone in it and the repose that softened it even 
before he spoke, “How excellent are these words and how beautiful!” he 
said, when Mus‘ab had finished. “What do ye do, if ye wish to enter this 
religion?” They told him that he must wash himself from head to foot in 
order to be purified, and that he must also purify his garments and then 
perform the prayer. There was a well in the garden where they were sitting, 
so he washed himself and purified his garments and testified There is no 
god but God and Muhammad is the Messenger of God. They showed him 
how to pray, and he prayed. Then he said: “There is a man behind me who, 
if he follow you, will be followed without fail by every man of his people, 
and I will send him to you now.” 

So he went back to his clansmen, and even before he reached them they 
could see that he was a changed man. “What hast thou done?” said Sa‘d. “I 
spake unto the two men,” said Usayd, “and by God I saw no harm in them. 
But I forbade them to continue and they said: ‘We will do as thou wilt.’ “I 
see thou hast been of no avail,” said Sa‘d, taking the lance from his hand 
and setting off to where the believers were still sitting peacefully in the 
garden. He remonstrated with his cousin As‘ad and upraided him for 
taking advantage of their kinship. But Mus‘ab intervened, speaking to him 
just as he had spoken to Usayd, whereupon Sa‘d agreed to listen to him, 
and the result was finally the same. 


See p. 57. 



no Muhammad 


When Sa‘d had performed the prayer, he rejoined Usayd and those that 
were with him and together they went to the assembly of their people. Sa‘d 
addressed them and said: “What know ye of my standing amongst you?” 
“Thou art our liege lord,” they answered, “and the best of us in judgement, 
and the most auspicious in leadership.” “Then I tell you,” he said, “I swear 
I will speak neither to your men nor to your women until ye believe in God 
and His Messenger.” And by nightfall there was no man or woman of his 
clan who had not entered Islam. 

Mus‘ab stayed with As‘ad for about eleven months, and many were the 
people who embraced Islam during that time. Then, when the month of the 
next Pilgrimage drew near, he returned to Mecca to give tidings to the 
Prophet of how he had fared among the various clans of Aws and Khazraj. 

The Prophet knew that the well watered land between two tracts of 
black stones which he had seen in a vision was Yathrib, and he knew that 
this time he too would be of the emigrants. Now there were few people in 
Mecca whom he trusted so much as his aunt by marriage, Umm al-Fadl. 
He was also certain that his uncle ‘Abbas, although he had not entered 
Islam, would never betray him and never divulge a secret confided to him. 
So he told them both that he hoped to go and live in Yathrib and that much 
depended on the delegation which was expected from the oasis for the 
coming Pilgrimage. On hearing this, ‘Abbas said that he felt it his duty to 
go with his nephew to meet the delegates and speak with them, and the 
Prophet agreed. 

Not long after Mus‘ab’s departure, some of the Muslims of Yathrib set 
out upon the Pilgrimage as had been arranged between him and them, in all 
seventy-three men and two women, hoping to make contact with the 
Prophet. One of their leaders was a Khazrayite chief named Bara’, and 
during the first days of the journey a preoccupying thought came over him. 
They were on their way towards Mecca wherein was the House of God, the 
Ka‘bah, the greatest centre of pilgrimage for the whole of Arabia; and 
therein was also the Prophet, to whom they were going, and it was there 
that the Koran had been revealed, and thither their souls were moving 
ahead of them in aspiration. Was it then right or reasonable, when the time 
came for prayer, that they should turn their backs on that direction and 
face towards the north, towards Syria? This may have been more than a 
mere thought, for Bara’ had only a few more months to live, and men who 
are near to death are sometimes gifted with premonitions. However that 
may be, he told his companions what was in his mind, whereupon they said 
that as far as they knew the Prophet was wont to pray towards Syria, that is 
towards Jerusalem, and they did not wish to differ from him. “I shall pray 
towards the Ka‘bah,” said Bara’, and he did so throughout the journey, 
while all the others continued to pray towards Jerusalem. They remon¬ 
strated with him to no avail, except that when they arrived in Mecca he 
had some misgivings and he said to Ka‘b ibn Malik, one of his younger 
clansmen - and one of the more gifted poets of Yathrib: “Son of my 
brother, let us go to the Messenger of God and ask him about what I did on 
this journey, for doubts have fallen into my soul through my seeing that ye 
were against me.” So they asked a man in Mecca where they could find the 
Prophet, whom they did not even know by sight. “Know ye his uncle 



Yathrib Responsive 111 

‘Abbas?” said the man, and they replied that they did, for ‘Abbas was a 
frequent visitor to Yathrib and was well known there. “When ye enter the 
Mosque,” said their informant, “he is the man sitting beside ‘Abbas.” So 
they went to the Prophet, who said, in answer to the question of Bara’: 
“Thou hadst a direction, if thou hadst but kept to it.” Bara’ took to praying 
towards Jerusalem once more, in order to do as the Prophet did, though the 
answer he had received could have been taken in more than one sense. 

Their journey to Mecca had been in a caravan together with the 
polytheist pilgrims of Yathrib, one of whom entered Islam in the valley of 
Mina, an eminent Khazrajite, Abu Jabir ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amr, a leader of 
the Bani Salimah and a man of great influence. It was agreed that they 
should secretly meet the Prophet as before at ‘Aqabah on the second of the 
nights immediately following the Pilgrimage. In the words of one of them: 
“We slept that night with our people in the caravan until when a third of 
the night had passed we crept out from amongst the sleepers to our 
appointed meeting with the Messenger of God, stealing as stealthily as 
sand-grouse, until we were all assembled in the gully near ‘Aqabah. There 
we waited until the Messenger came, and with him came his uncle ‘Abbas 
who was at that time still of the religion of his people, albeit that he wished 
to be present at his nephew’s transaction and to make sure that the 
promises made to him were reliable. When the Prophet was seated, ‘Abbas 
was the first to speak: ‘People of Khazraj’ - for so the Arabs were wont to 
address Khazraj and Aws - ‘ye know the esteem in which we hold 
Muhammad, and we have protected him from his people so that he is 
honoured in his clan and safe in his country. Yet hath he resolved to turn 
unto you and join himself with you. So if ye think that ye will keep to what 
ye promise him, and that ye will protect him against all that shall oppose 
him, yours be that burden which ye have taken upon yourselves. But if ye 
think ye will betray him and fail him after he hath gone out unto you, then 
leave him now.’ ‘We have heard what thou sayest,’ they answered, ‘but 
speak thou, O Messenger of God, and choose for thyself and for thy Lord 
what thou wilt.’” 

After reciting from the Koran and pronouncing a summons to God and 
to Islam, the Prophet said: “I make with you this pact on condition that the 
allegiance ye pledge me shall bind you to protect me even as ye protect your 
women and your children.” Bara’ rose and took his hand and said: “By 
Him who sent thee with the truth, we will protect thee as we protect them. 
So accept the pledge of our allegiance, O Messenger of God, for we are men 
of war, possessed of arms that have been handed down from father to 
son.” A man of Aws then broke in upon him and said: “O Messenger of 
God, there are ties between us and other men” - he meant the Jews - “and 
we are willing to sever them. But might it not be that if we do this, and if 
then God give thee victory, thou wilt return to thy people and leave us?” 
The Prophet smiled and said: “Nay, I am yours and ye are mine. Whom ye 
war against, him I war against. Whom ye make peace with, him I make 
peace with.” 

Then he said: “Bring out to me twelve of your men as leaders, that they 
may look to the affairs of their people.” So they brought out to him twelve 
leaders, nine from Khazraj and three from Aws, since sixty-two of the men 



m Muhammad 


were of Khazraj and also the two women, whereas only eleven were from 
Aws. Amongst the nine leaders of Khazraj were As‘ad and Bara’; amongst 
the three of Aws was Usayd whom Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh had sent to represent 
him. 

When the people were about to pledge themselves, one by one, to the 
Prophet, a man of Khazraj, one of the twelve who had pledged himself the 
previous year, made a sign that they should wait, and he addressed them 
saying: “Men of Khazraj, know ye what it means to pledge yourselves to 
this man?” “We know,” they said, but he disregarded them. “Ye pledge 
yourselves”, he continued, “to war against all men, the red and the black. 1 
So if ye think that when ye suffer the loss of possessions and when some of 
your nobles are slain ye will forsake him, forsake him now, for if ye forsake 
him then it will bring shame upon you in this world and the next. But if ye 
think ye will fulfil your pledge, then take him, for therein, by God, is the 
best of this world and the next.” They said: “What though our possessions 
be lost and our nobles slain, yet do we take him. And what shall be ours 
thereby, O Messenger of God, if we fulfil to thee our pledge?” “Paradise,” 
he said, and they said: “Stretch forth thy hand,” and he stretched out his 
hand and they pledged their oaths. 

And Satan was watching and listening from the top of ‘Aqabah; and 
when he could contain himself no longer he cried out in the loudest voice 
possible and spoke the name Mudhammam, Reprobate; and the Prophet 
knew who it was who had thus cried, and he answered him, saying: “O 
enemy of God, I will give thee no respite.” 

1 That is, all men whatsoever. After this second pledge at ‘Aqabah, that of the First 
‘Aqabah came to be called “the pledge of the women”. It continued to be used, but for women 
only, because it contained no mention of the duties of war. 



XXXV 

Many Emigrations 


T HE Prophet now encouraged his followers in Mecca to emigrate to 
Yathrib. But one of them had already done so. The death of Abu 
Talib had deprived his nephew Abu Salamah of a protector, and he 
felt compelled to take refuge from his own clan. So he set off for the north, 
mounting his wife on a camel with their young son Salamah in her arms 
and himself leading the camel. But Umm Salamah was of the other branch 
of Makhzum, the Bani l-Mughlrah, and first cousin to Abu Jahl; and some 
of her family went after them and snatched the camel’s rope from Abu 
Salamah’s hand. He was far outnumbered and knew it would be useless to 
resist so he told her to return with them. He would find a way for her to join 
him. But when his branch of Makhzum heard of it they were angry with the 
Bani l-Mughlrah and made matters worse by claiming custody of the boy. 
So the three of them were cruelly separated until the whole clan took pity 
on her and allowed her to take her son and join her husband. She set off on 
a camel entirely alone except for Salamah, but after almost six miles she 
met a man of ‘Abd ad-Dar, ‘Uthman ibn Talhah, not yet a believer, who 
insisted on escorting her to the end of her journey. They had heard that 
Abu Salamah was in Quba’, a village at the most southerly point of Yathrib 
where the oasis juts out into the lava tract which is one of “the two tracts of 
black stones”; so when they came within sight of the palm groves ‘Uthman 
said to her: “Thy husband is in this village, so enter it with God’s blessing,” 
and he himself turned back again towards Mecca. Umm Salamah never 
forgot his kindness, and never ceased to praise him for his nobility. 

After the pledge of the Second ‘Aqabah, the Muslims of Quraysh began 
to emigrate in considerable numbers. Amongst the first to go were some 
others of the Prophet’s cousins, sons and daughters of Jahsh and 
Umaymah, ‘Abd Allah and his blind brother Abu Ahmad, and their two 
sisters Zaynab and Hamnah. With them went many others of the Bani 
Asad who had long been confederates of ‘Abdu Shams. Hamzah and Zayd 
went, leaving their wives in Mecca for the moment, but ‘Uthman took 
Ruqayyah with him, and ‘Umar took his wife Zaynab, their daughter 
Hafsah and their young son ‘Abd Allah. Hafsah’s husband, Khunays of 
Sahm, was also with them. Abu Salamah’s half-brother, Abu Sabrah, took 
with him his wife Umm Kulthum, Suhayl’s daughter; and other young 
cousins of the Prophet who now went were Zubayr and Tulayb. 

It was not long before all his closest Companions had left Mecca except 



114 Muhammad 

Abu Bakr and ‘All. Abu Bakr had asked the Prophet’s permission to 
emigrate, but he had said: “Hasten not away, for it may be that God will 
give thee a companion. ” So Abu Bakr understood that he must wait for the 
Prophet, and he gave orders for two of his camels to be fed on gum acacia 
leaves in preparation for their journey to Yathrib. 

Quraysh did what they could to stop the emigrations. Suhayl’s other 
daughter had now gone with her husband Abu Hudhayfah, just as they 
had previously gone to Abyssinia, but Suhayl was determined that this 
time his son ‘Abd Allah should not escape him, so he kept a close watch on 
him. Much the same happened to the son of the Sahmite leader ‘As, 
Hisham, who likewise had been among the emigrants to Abyssinia. It was 
his half-brother ‘Amr who had been sent by Quraysh to turn the Negus 
against the Muslim refugees, and Hisham had witnessed his failure and 
discomforture. ‘Umar, who was Hisham’s cousin — their mothers were 
sisters — had arranged that they should now travel to Yathrib together, 
leaving Mecca separately and meeting at the thorn-trees of Adat about ten 
miles north of the city. ‘Ayyash of Makhzum was also to travel with them; 
but at the appointed hour and place there was no sign of Hisham, so ‘Umar 
and his family went on their way with ‘Ayyash, for they had agreed that 
they would not wait for each other. Hisham’s father and brother had heard 
of his plan and held him back by force; and they put so much pressure on 
him that after some days they even persuaded him to renounce Islam. 

As to ‘Ayyash, he reached Yathrib with ‘Umar, but his two half- 
brothers, Abu Jahl and Harith, followed him and told him that their 
mother, who was also his mother, had sworn not to comb her hair or take 
shelter from the sun until she set eyes on him again. ‘Ayyash was very 
troubled by this, but ‘Umar said to him: “They want nothing better than to 
seduce thee from thy religion; for by God, if lice troubled thy mother, she 
would use her comb; and if the heat of Mecca oppressed her, she would 
take shelter.” But ‘Ayyash would not listen: he insisted on returning to 
Mecca in order to release his mother from her oath. He also intended to 
retrieve some money he had left behind. But when they were half-way there 
Abu Jahl and Harith fell upon him, bound him hand and foot, brought him 
home as a prisoner, saying as they entered the city: “O people of Mecca, do 
with your fools as we have done with this fool of ours.” Like Hisham, 
‘Ayyash was prevailed upon to renounce Islam, but in neither case was this 
final. After a while they were conscience-stricken to the point of supposing 
that no atonement was possible for so great a sin, and that was ‘Umar’s 
opinion also. But later there came the Revelation: O My slaves who have 
acted unwisely against your selves, despair not of God's Mercy. Verily God 
forgiveth sins in their entirety , He is the All-Forgiving, the All-Merciful. 
And turn unto your Lord in repentance and surrender unto Him before 
there come unto you the punishment, when ye shall not be helped .* ‘Umar 
wrote down these words and found a way of sending the inscription to 
Hisham, who said: “When it came to me I raised it close to my eyes and 
lowered it away from them, but I could not understand it, until I said: ‘O 
God, make me understand it.’ Then God put it into my heart that it had 


1 XXXIX, 53-4. 



Many Emigrations 115 

been revealed for our very sakes with regard to what we were saying of 
ourselves and what was being said of us.” Hisham showed it to ‘Ayyash 
and they renewed their Islam and waited for their opportunity to escape. 



XXXVI 

A Conspiracy 

T HE apparent apostasies of Hisham and ‘Ayyash were but small 
triumphs for Quraysh, heavily outweighed by the steady stream of 
emigrants which they were unable to control. Some of the larger 
houses in Mecca were now tenantless; others, which had been full, were 
now empty save for one or two old people. In the city which had seemed so 
prosperous and harmonious only ten years ago everything had changed, 
thanks to this one man. But while these feelings of sadness and melancholy 
came and went, there was the persistent consciousness of a growing danger 
from that city to the north where so many potential enemies were now 
gathering together — men who cared nothing for the ties of kinship if they 
came into conflict with their religion. Those who had heard the Prophet 
say “Quraysh, I bring you slaughter” had never forgotten it, though at the 
time there seemed to be nothing to fear. But if he now eluded them, despite 
the perpetual watch they kept upon his movements, and made his way to 
Yathrib, those words might prove to be more than a mere threat. 

The death of Mut‘im, the Prophet’s protector, seemed to clear the way 
for action; and to clear it still further, Abu Lahab deliberately absented 
himself from the meeting which the leaders of Quraysh now held in the 
Assembly. After a long discussion, when various suggestions had been 
made and rejected, they agreed - some of them with reluctance - to the 
plan put forward by Abu Jahl as being the only effective solution to their 
problem. Every clan was to nominate a strong, reliable and well-connected 
young man, and at a given moment all these chosen men together should 
fall upon Muhammad, each striking him a mortal blow, so that his blood 
would be on all the clans. The Bani Hashim would not be able to fight the 
whole tribe of Quraysh; they would have to accept blood money - which 
would be offered them - in place of revenge; and so at last the community 
would be rid of a man who, as long as he lived, would give them no peace. 

Gabriel now came to the Prophet and told him what he should do. It was 
noon, an unusual time for visiting, but the Prophet went straight to the 
house of Abu Bakr who knew at once, as soon as he saw him at that hour, 
that something important had happened. ‘A’ishah and her elder sister 
Asma’ were with their father when the Prophet came in. “God hath 
allowed me to leave the city and to emigrate,” he said. “Together with 
me?” said Abu Bakr. “Together with thee,” said the Prophet. ‘A’ishah was 
at that time in her seventh year. She used to say afterwards: “I knew not 
before that day that one could weep for joy until I saw Abu Bakr weep at 
those words.” 



A Conspiracy 117 

When they had made their plans, the Prophet returned to his house and 
told ‘All that he was about to leave for Yathrib, bidding him stay behind in 
Mecca until he had given back to their owners all the goods which had 
been deposited in their house for safe keeping. The Prophet had never 
ceased to be known as al-Amln, and there were still many disbelievers who 
would trust him with their property as they would trust no one else. He 
also told ‘All what Gabriel had told him about the plot Quraysh had made 
against him. 

The young men chosen to kill him had agreed to meet outside his gate 
after nightfall. But while they were waiting until their numbers were 
complete, they heard the sound of women’s voices coming from the house, 
the voices of Sawdah, Umm Kulthum, Fatimah and Umm Ayman. That 
gave them cause to think; and one of the men said that if they climbed over 
the wall and broke into the house their names would be for ever held in 
dishonour among the Arabs because they had violated the privacy of 
women. So they decided to wait until their intended victim came out, as it 
was his wont to do in the early morning, if he came not out before. 

The Prophet and ‘All were soon aware of their presence; and the Prophet 
took up a cloak in which he used to sleep and gave it to ‘All, saying: “Sleep 
thou on my bed, and wrap thyself in this green HadramI cloak of mine. 
Sleep in it, and no harm shall come to thee from them.” Then he began to 
recite the Surah that is named after its opening letters, Ya-Stn ; and, when 
he came to the words: And We have enshrouded them , so that they see 
not , 1 he went out of the house; and God took away their sight so that they 
did not see him, and he passed through their midst and went on his way. 

A man was coming in the opposite direction, and their paths crossed, 
and he recognised the Prophet. A little later his path took him not far from 
the Prophet’s house, and seeing men at its gate, he called out to them that if 
it was Muhammad they wanted he was not there but had gone out not long 
since. “How could that be?” they thought. One of the conspirators had 
been watching the house and had seen the Prophet enter it before the others 
had arrived; and they were certain that no one had left it while they had 
been there. But now they began to be uneasy, until one of them who knew 
where the Prophet slept went to a point from which he could see through 
the window, just enough to make sure that someone was sleeping on the 
Prophet’s bed, wrapped in a cloak, so he reassured his fellows that their 
man was still there. But when it was dawn ‘All rose and went to the door of 
the house, still wrapped in the cloak; and they saw who it was, and began 
to think they had been somehow outwitted. They waited a little longer; the 
thinnest of crescents, all that was left of the waning moon of the month of 
Safar, had risen over the eastern hills, and now it began to pale as the light 
increased. There was still no sign of the Prophet, and with a sudden 
impulse they decided to go, each one to his chief of clan, to give the alarm. 


1 XXXVL, 9. 



XXXVII 


The Hijrah 


M EANTIME the Prophet had returned to Abu Bakr, and losing 
no time they went out through a window at the back of his house 
where two camels, already saddled, were waiting for them. The 
Prophet mounted one of them, and Abu Bakr the other, with his son ‘ Abd 
Allah behind him. As they had planned, they made for a cave in the Mount 
of Thawr a little to the south, on the way to the Yemen, for they knew that 
as soon as the Prophet’s absence was discovered search parties would be 
sent out to cover all the northern outskirts of the city. When they had gone 
a little way beyond the precincts of Mecca, the Prophet halted his camel, 
and looking back he said: “Of all God’s earth, thou art the dearest place 
unto me and the dearest unto God, and had not my people driven me out 
from thee I would not have left thee.” 

‘Amir ibn Fuhayrah, the shepherd whom Abu Bakr had bought as a 
slave and then set free and put in charge of his sheep, had followed behind 
them with his flock to cover up their tracks. When they reached the cave, 
Abu Bakr sent his son home with the camels, telling him to listen to what 
was said in Mecca the next day when the Prophet’s absence was dis¬ 
covered, and to bring them word of it the following night. ‘Amir was to 
pasture his sheep as usual with the other shepherds during the day and to 
bring them to the cave at night, always covering up the tracks of ‘Abd Allah 
between Thawr and Mecca. 

The next night ‘Abd Allah returned to the cave and his sister Asma’ came 
with him, bringing food. Their news was that Quraysh had offered a 
reward of a hundred camels to anyone who could find Muhammad and 
bring him back to Mecca. Horsemen were already following every normal 
route from Mecca to Yathrib, hoping to overtake them both — for it was 
assumed that Abu Bakr was with the Prophet, since he also had dis¬ 
appeared. 

But others, perhaps unknown to ‘Abd Allah, thought they must be in 
hiding, in one of the numerous caves in the hills round Mecca. Moreover, 
the Arabs of the desert are good trackers: even when a flock of sheep had 
followed in the wake of two or three camels, the average Bedouin would 
see at a glance the remains of the larger prints of the camel-hooves which 
the multitude of smaller prints had all but obliterated. It seemed unlikely 
that the fugitives would be to the south of the city; but for such a generous 
reward every possibility should be tried; and camels had certainly pre¬ 
ceded the sheep on those tracks which led in the direction of Thawr. 

On the third day the silence of their mountain sanctuary was broken by 



TheHijrah 119 

the sound of birds — a pair of rock doves they thought — cooing and 
fluttering their wings outside the cave. Then after a while they heard the 
faint sound of men’s voices, at some distance below them but gradually 
growing louder as if the men were climbing up the side of the mount. They 
were not expecting ‘Abd Allah until after nightfall, and there were still 
some hours to go before sunset, although in fact there was strangely little 
light in the cave for the time of day they supposed it to be. The voices were 
now not far off - five or six men at least - and they were still approaching. 
The Prophet looked at Abu Bakr, and said: Grieve not , for verily God is 
with us? And then he said: “What thinkest thou of two when God is their 
third?” 2 They could now hear the sound of steps, which drew nearer and 
then stopped: the men were standing outside the cave. They spoke 
decisively, all in agreement that there was no need to enter the cave, since 
no one could possibly be there. Then they turned back the way they had 
come. 

When the sound of their retreating steps and voices had died away, the 
Prophet and Abu Bakr went to the mouth of the cave. There in front of it, 
almost covering the entrance, was an acacia tree, about the height of a 
man, which had not been there that morning; and over the gap that was left 
between the tree and the wall of the cave a spider had woven its web. They 
looked through the web, and there in the hollow of a rock, even where a 
man might step as he entered the cave, a rock dove had made a nesting 
place and was sitting close as if she had eggs, with her mate perched on a 
ledge not far above. 

When they heard ‘Abd Allah and his sister approaching at the expected 
hour, they gently drew aside the web that had been their safeguard, and 
taking care not to disturb the dove, they went to meet them. ‘Amir had also 
come, this time without his flock. He had brought the Bedouin to whom 
Abu Bakr had entrusted the two camels he had chosen for their journey. 
The man was not yet a believer, but he could be relied on to keep their 
secret and also to guide them to their destination by such out-of-the-way 
paths as only a true son of the desert would know. He was waiting in the 
valley below with the two mounts, and had brought a third camel for 
himself. Abu Bakr was to take ‘Amir behind him on his, to look after their 
needs. They left the cave, and descended the slope. Asma’ had brought a 
bag of provisions, but had forgotten to bring a rope. So she took off her 
girdle and divided it into two lengths, using one to tie the bag securely to 
her father’s saddle and keeping the other for herself. Thus it was that she 
earned the title “She of the two girdles”. 

When Abu Bakr offered the Prophet the better of the two camels he said: 
“I will not ride a camel that is not mine own.” “But she is thine, O 
messenger of God.” said Abu Bakr. “Nay,” said the Prophet; “but what 
price didst thou pay for her?” Abu Bakr told him, and he said: “I take her 
at that price.” Nor did Abu Bakr insist further on making it a gift, although 
the Prophet had accepted many gifts from him in the past, for this occasion 
was a solemn one. It was the Prophet’s Hijrah , his cutting off of all ties of 
home and homeland for the sake of God. His offering, the act of emigra- 


IX, 40. 


2 b.lvii, 5 . 



120 Muhammad 


tion, must be entirely his, not shared by another in any respect. The mount 
on which the act was accomplished must therefore be his own, since it was 
part of his offering. The camel’s name was Qaswa’, and she remained his 
favourite camel. 

Their guide took them away from Mecca to the west and a little to the 
south until they came to the shore of the Red Sea. Yathrib is due north of 
Mecca, but it was only at this point that any north came into their 
direction. The coastal road runs north-west and for a few days they kept to 
this. On one of their first evenings, looking across the water towards the 
Nubian desert, they saw the new moon of the month of Rabral-Awwal. 
“O crescent of good and of guidance, my faith is in Him who created 
thee.” 1 This the Prophet would say when he saw the new moon. 

One morning they were somewhat dismayed to see a small caravan 
approaching from the opposite direction. But their feelings changed to joy 
when they saw that it was Abu Bakr’s cousin Talhah who was on his way 
from Syria where he had bought the cloth and other merchandise with 
which his camels were laden. He had stopped in Yathrib on his way, and 
intended to return there as soon as he had disposed of his wares in Mecca. 
The Prophet’s arrival in the oasis, he said, was awaited with the greatest 
eagerness; and before bidding them farewell he gave them each a change of 
clothes from out of the fine white Syrian garments which he had intended 
to sell to some of the richer men of Quraysh. 

Not long after their meeting with Talhah they turned due north, going 
slightly inland from the coast, and then north-east, now at last making 
directly for Yathrib. At one point of their journey the Prophet received a 
Revelation which told him: Verily He who hath made binding upon thee 
the Koran will bring thee home once more . 2 

Shortly before dawn on the twelfth day after leaving the cave they 
reached the valley of ‘Aqlq, and crossing the valley, they climbed up the 
rugged black slopes on the other side. Before they reached the top the sun 
was well up and the heat was intense. On other days they would have 
stopped for rest until the great heat of the day had passed; but they now 
decided to climb the final ridge of the ascent, and when at last they came 
within sight of the plain below there could be no question of holding back. 
The place that the Prophet had dreamed of, “the well watered land 
between two tracts of black stones,” was lying before them, and the 
grey-green of the palm groves and the lighter green of orchards and 
gardens stretched at one point to within three miles of the foot of the slope 
they had to descend. 

The nearest point of greenery was Quba’, where most of the emigrants 
from Mecca had first stayed, and where many of them still were. The 
Prophet told their guide: “Lead us straight to the Bani ‘Amr at Quba’, and 
draw not yet nigh unto the city” - for so the most densely inhabited part of 
the oasis was called. That city was soon to be known throughout Arabia, 
and thence elsewhere, as “the City”, in Arabic al-Madmah, in English 
Medina. 

Several days previously news from Mecca of the Prophet’s disappear- 


1 A.H. V, 329. 2 XXVIII, 85. 



TheHijrab 121 


ance, and of the reward offered for him, had reached the oasis. The people 
of Quba’ were expecting him daily, for the time of his arrival was now 
overdue; so every morning, after the dawn prayer, some of the Bani ‘Amr 
would go out to look for him, and with them went men of other clans who 
lived in that village, and also those of the emigrant Quraysh who were still 
there and had not yet moved to Medina. They would go out beyond the 
fields and palm groves onto the lava tract, and after they had gone some 
distance they would stop and wait until the heat of the sun became fierce; 
then they would return to their homes. They had gone out that morning, 
but had already returned by the time the four travellers had begun their 
descent of the rocky slope. Eyes were no longer staring expectantly in that 
direction; but the sun shone on the new white garments of the Prophet and 
Abu Bakr which were set off all the more against the background of 
bluish-black volcanic stones, and a Jew who happened to be on the roof of 
his house caught sight of them. He knew at once who they must be, for the 
Jews of Quba’ had asked and been told why so many of their neighbours 
had taken to going out in a body into the wilderness every morning 
without fail. So he called out at the top of his voice: “Sons of Qaylah, he is 
come, he is come!” The call was immediately taken up, and men, women 
and children hurried from their houses and streamed out once more onto 
the strip of greenery which led to the stone tract. But they had not far to go, 
for the travellers had by now reached the most outlying palm-grove. It was 
a noon of great joy on all sides, and the Prophet addressed them, saying: 
“O people, give unto one another greetings of Peace; feed food unto the 
hungry; honour the ties of kinship; pray in the hours when men sleep. Even 
so shall ye enter Paradise in Peace.” 1 

It was decided that he should lodge with Kulthum, an old man of Quba’ 
who had previously welcomed both Hamzah and Zayd in his house on 
their arrival from Mecca. The Bani ‘Amr, Kulthum’s clan, were of Aws, 
and it was no doubt partly in order that both the Yathrib tribes might share 
in the hospitality that Abu Bakr lodged with a man of Khazraj in the village 
of Sunh which was a little nearer to Medina. After a day or two, ‘AU 
arrived from Mecca, and stayed in the same house as the Prophet. It had 
taken him three days to return all the property which had been deposited 
with them to its various owners. 

Many were those who now came to greet the Prophet, and amongst 
them were some Jews of Medina who were drawn more by curiosity than 
good will. But on the second or third evening there came a man who was 
different in appearance from any of the others, clearly neither an Arab nor 
a Jew. Salman, for so he was named, had been born of Persian Zoroastrian 
parents in the village of Jayy near Isfahan, but he had become a Christian 
and gone to Syria as a very young man. There he had attached himself to a 
saintly bishop who, on his deathbed, recommended him to go to the 
Bishop of Mosul, who was old like himself but the best man he knew. 
Salman set off for the north of Iraq, and this was for him the beginning of a 
series of attachments to elderly Christian sages until the last of these, also 
on his deathbed, told him that the time was now at hand when a Prophet 

1 I.S. 1/1,159. 



122 Muhammad 


would appear: “He will be sent with the religion of Abraham and will 
come forth in Arabia where he will emigrate from his home to a place 
between two lava tracts, a country of palms. His signs are manifest: he will 
eat of a gift but not if it be given as alms; and between his shoulders is the 
seal of prophecy.” Salman made up his mind to join the Prophet and paid a 
party of merchants of the tribe of Kalb to take him with them to Arabia. 
But when they reached Wadi 1 -Qura near the Gulf of ‘Aqabah at the north 
of the Red Sea they sold him as a slave to a Jew. The sight of the palms in 
Wadi 1 -Qura made him wonder whether this could be the township he was 
seeking, but he had his doubts. It was not long however before the Jew sold 
him to a cousin of his of the Bani Qurayzah in Medina; and as soon as he 
saw the lie of the land, he knew beyond doubt that here was the place to 
which the Prophet would migrate. 

Salman’s new owner had another cousin who lived in Quba’; and on the 
arrival of the Prophet this Jew of Quba’ set off for Medina with the news. 
He found his cousin sitting beneath one of his palms; and Salman, who was 
working in the top of the tree, heard him say: “God curse the sons of 
Qaylah! They are even now gathered together at Quba’ about a man who 
hath come to them this day from Mecca. They claim him to be a Prophet.” 
Those last words filled Salman with certainty that his hopes had been 
realised, and the impact was so great that his whole body was seized with 
trembling. He was afraid that he would fall out of the tree, so he climbed 
down; and once on the ground he eagerly began to question the Jew from 
Quba’, but his master was angry and ordered him back to his work in the 
tree. That evening however he slipped away, taking with him some of his 
food which he had saved, and went to Quba’, where he found the Prophet 
sitting with many companions, new and old. Salman was already con¬ 
vinced, but he none the less approached him and offered him the food, 
specifying that he gave it as alms. The Prophet told his companions to eat 
of it, but did not eat of it himself. Salman hoped that he would one day see 
the seal of prophecy, but to have been in the presence of the Prophet and to 
have heard him speak was enough for that first encounter, and he returned 
to Medina elated and thankful. 



XXXVIII 

The Entry into 
Medina 

T HE Prophet had reached the oasis on Monday 27 September ad 
622. Various messages soon made it clear that the people of Medina 
were impatient for his arrival there, so he only stayed three full days 
in Quba’, during which he laid the foundations of a mosque, the first to be 
built in Islam. On the Friday morning he set out from Quba’, and at noon 
he and his companions stopped in the valley of Ranuna’ to pray the prayer 
with the Khazrajite clan of the Bani Salim who were expecting him. This 
was the first Friday Prayer that he prayed in the country that from now on 
was to be his home. Some of his kinsmen of the Bani an-Naj jar had come to 
meet him, and some of the Bani ‘ Amr had escorted him from Quba’, which 
brought the whole congregation up to about a hundred men. After the 
prayer the Prophet mounted Qaswa’, and Abu Bakr and others of Quraysh 
also mounted their camels and set off with him for the city. To the right and 
to the left of them, dressed in armour with their swords drawn, rode men of 
Aws and Khazraj, as a guard of honour and by way of demonstration that 
the oath they had taken to protect him was no empty word, though they 
knew well that then and there he would need no protection. Never was a 
day of greater rejoicing. “Come is the Prophet of God! Come is the Prophet 
of God!” was the joyous cry that went up from more and more voices of 
men and women and children who had lined the route. Qaswa’ set the slow 
and stately pace of the procession as it passed amid the gardens and palm 
groves to the south of Medina. The houses were still few and far between, 
but gradually they entered more closely built districts, and many were the 
eager invitations which were offered. “Alight here, O Messenger of God, 
for we have strength and protection for thee, and abundance.” More than 
once a man or a group of clansmen took hold of Qaswa’s halter. But each 
time the Prophet blessed them and then said: “Let her go her way, for she is 
under the command of God.” 

At one point it seemed as if she were making for the houses of the 
Prophet’s nearest kinsmen of the ‘Adi branch of the great Khazrajite clan 
of Najjar, for she turned into the eastern part of the city where most of the 
clan lived. But she passed by the place where he had stayed with his mother 
as a child and by all the other houses of those nearest to him, despite their 
earnest entreaties that he should make his home there. The Prophet gave 



124 Muhammad 

them the same reply that he had given to the others, and they could only 
submit. He had now reached the houses of the Bani Malik branch of 
Najjar. To this subclan belonged two of those six men who had pledged 
allegiance to him the year before the First ‘Aqabah, As‘ad and ‘Awf; and 
here Qaswa’ turned from the road into a large walled courtyard which had 
in it a few date palms and the ruins of a building. One end had been used at 
some time as a burial ground. There was also a place set apart for drying 
dates. Slowly she made her way towards a rough enclosure which As‘ad 
had set up as a place of prayer, and there at the entrance she knelt. The 
Prophet let go her rein, but did not alight; and after a moment she rose to 
her feet and began to walk leisurely away. But she had not gone far when 
she stopped, turned in her tracks and walked back to where she had first 
knelt. Then she knelt again; and this time she flattened her chest against 
the ground. The Prophet alighted and said: “This, if God will, is the 
dwelling.” 1 

He then asked who owned the courtyard, and Mu‘adh, the brother of 
‘Awf, told him it belonged to two orphan boys, Sahl and Suhayl. They were 
under the guardianship of As‘ad, and the Prophet asked him to bring them 
to him, but they were already at hand and came and stood before him. He 
asked them if they would sell him the courtyard, and told them to name 
their price, but they said: “Nay, we give it thee, O Messenger of God.” He 
would not, however, take it as a gift, and the price was fixed with the help 
of As‘ad. Meanwhile Abu Ayyub Khalid, who lived nearby, had untied the 
baggage and carried it into his house. Others of the clan now came and 
begged the Prophet to be their guest, but he said: “A man must be with his 
baggage.” Abu Ayyub had been the first of the clan to pledge himself at the 
Second ‘Aqabah. He and his wife now withdrew to the upper part of his 
house, leaving the ground floor for the Prophet; and As‘ad led Qaswa’ to 
the courtyard of his own house which was close by. 


1 B.LXIII. 



XXXIX 


Harmony and 
Discord 

T HE Prophet gave orders that his newly acquired courtyard should 
be made into a mosque, and as in Quba’ they began work on it 
immediately. Most of the building was done with bricks, but in the 
middle of the northern wall, that is, the Jerusalem wall, they put stones on 
either side of the prayer niche. The palms in the courtyard were cut down 
and their trunks were used as pillars to support the roof of palm branches, 
but the greater part of the courtyard was left open. 

The Muslims of Medina had been given by the Prophet the title of Ansar 
which means Helpers, whereas the Muslims of Quraysh and other tribes 
who had left their homes and emigrated to the oasis he called Muhafirah , 
that is, Emigrants. All took part in the work, including the Prophet himself, 
and as they worked they chanted two verses which one of them had made 
up for the occasion: 

“O God, no good is but the good hereafter, 

So help the Helpers and the Emigrants.” 

And sometimes they chanted: 

“No life there is but life of the Hereafter. 

Mercy, O God, on Emigrants and Helpers.” 

It was to be hoped that these two parties would be strengthened by a 
third, and the Prophet now made a covenant of mutual obligation between 
his followers and the Jews of the oasis, forming them into a single 
community of believers but allowing for the differences between the two 
religions. Muslims and Jews were to have equal status. If a Jew were 
wronged, then he must be helped to his rights by both Muslim and Jew, 
and so also if a Muslim were wronged. In case of war against the 
polytheists they must fight as one people, and neither Jews nor Muslims 
were to make a separate peace, but peace was to be indivisible. In case of 
differences of opinion or dispute or controversy, the matter was to be 
referred to God.through His Messenger. There was, however, no express 
stipulation that the Jews should formally recognise Muhammad as the 



126 Muhammad 


Messenger and Prophet of God, though he was referred to as such 
throughout the document. 

The Jews accepted this covenant for political reasons. The Prophet was 
already by far the most powerful man in Medina, and his power seemed 
likely to increase. They had no choice but to accept; yet very few of them 
were capable of believing that God would send a Prophet who was not a 
Jew. At first they were outwardly cordial, whatever they may have said 
amongst themselves and however set they were in the consciousness of 
their own superiority, the immense and incomparable superiority of the 
chosen people over all others. But though their scepticism with regard to 
the new religion was normally veiled, they were always ready to share it 
with any Arab who might have doubts about the Divine origin of the 
Revelation. 

Islam continued to spread rapidly throughout the clans of Aws and 
Khazraj, and some believers looked forward to the day when, thanks to the 
covenant with the Jews, the oasis would be one harmonious whole. But the 
Revelation now gave warning of hidden elements of discord. It was about 
this time that the longest surah of the Koran began to be revealed, 
al-Baqarah (the Heifer), which is placed at the beginning of the Book, 
immediately after the seven verses of al-Fatihah, the Opening. It starts with 
a definiton of the rightly guided: Alif- Lam - MTm. This beyond doubt is 
the Book, a guidance unto the God-fearing, who believe in the Unseen and 
perform the prayer and give of that which 'We have bestowed upon them; 
and who believe in that which is revealed unto thee and in that which was 
revealed before thee, and who are certain of the Hereafter. These are they 
who follow guidance from their Lord and these are they who shall 
prosper .* 

Then after mention of the disbelievers who are blind and deaf to the 
truth, a third body of people is mentioned: And of men there are some who 
say: We believe in God and in the last day, yet they are not believers . . . 
When they meet those who believe they say: we believe. And when they go 
apart unto their satans, they say: Verily we are with you; we did but mock . 1 
These were the waverers and doubters and hypocrites of Aws and Khazraj 
in all their varying degrees of insincerity; and their satans, that is their 
inspirers of evil, were the men and women of the disbelievers who did all 
they could to sow the seeds of doubt. The Prophet was here warned of a 
problem by which he had been altogether untroubled in Mecca. There the 
sincerity of those who embraced Islam was never to be doubted. The 
reasons for conversion could only be spiritual, since as regards the things 
of this world a convert had nothing to gain and in many cases much to lose. 
But now there were certain worldly reasons for entering the new religion, 
and these were steadily on the increase. The days of the total absence of 
hypocrites from the ranks of the Muslims were gone for ever. 

Some of the satans referred to were of the Jews. The same Revelation 
said: Many of the people of the Book 3 long to bring you back into disbelief 
after your belief through envy that is in their souls.* Eagerly the Jews had 
looked forward to the coming of the predicted Prophet, not for the sake of 

1 11,2-5. 2 11,8,14. 3 The Bible. 4 11,109. 



Harmony and Discord 127 

the spiritual enlightenment it would bring but so that they might regain 
their former supremacy in Yathrib; and now to their dismay they saw that 
it was a descendant of Ishmael, not of Isaac, who was proclaiming the truth 
of the One God, with a success which was truly suggestive of Divine 
support. They feared that he was indeed the promised Prophet, whence 
their envy of the people to whom he was sent. Yet they hoped that he was 
not, and they sought continually to persuade themselves and others that he 
had not the true requisites of a Heaven-sent Messenger. “Muhammad 
claimeth that tidings come to him from Heaven, yet he knoweth not where 
his camel is,” said a man of the Jews on a day when one of the Prophet’s 
camels had strayed. “I only know what God giveth me to know,” said the 
Prophet when he heard of it, “and this He hath shown me: she is in the glen 
that I will tell you of, caught to a tree by her halter.” 1 And some of the 
Helpers went and found her where he had said she was. 

Many of the Jews welcomed at first what seemed to be the end of all 
danger of a further outbreak of civil war in the oasis. There had none the 
less been advantages in that danger, for the division between the Arabs had 
greatly enhanced the status of the non-Arabs, who were much in demand 
as allies. But the union of Aws and Khazraj made the old alliances 
unnecessary, while at the same time it gave the Arabs of Yathrib a 
formidable strength. The covenant of the Jews with the Prophet made it 
possible for them to share in that strength. But it also meant incurring 
obligations for a possible war against the far greater Arab strength which 
lay beyond the oasis; there might be other grave disadvantages for them in 
the new order of things, which was as yet untried, whereas the old order 
they knew and they were so well versed in its ways that many of them soon 
longed to return to it. One elderly Jewish politician of the Bani Qaynuqa’, a 
master in the art of exploiting the discord between the Arab tribes, felt 
particularly frustrated by the new friendship between Aws and Khazraj. 
He therefore instructed a youth of his tribe who had a beautiful voice to go 
and sit amongst the Helpers when they were assembled together and to 
recite to them some of the poetry which had been composed by men of 
both tribes immediately before and after Bu‘ath, the most recent battle of 
the civil war — poems in revilement of enemies, glorying in deeds of 
prowess, elegies for the dead, threats of revenge. The youth did as he was 
told, and he quickly held the attention of all who were there, transporting 
them from the present into the past. The men of Aws vehemently ap¬ 
plauded the poetry of Aws and those of Khazraj the poetry of Khazraj; and 
then the two sides began to argue with each other, and to boast, and to 
shout abuse and threats, until, finally the cry burst forth: “To arms! To 
arms!” and they went out into the lava tract, bent on fighting the fight once 
again. When the news reached the Prophet he gathered together all the 
Emigrants who were at hand and hastened out to where the two hosts were 
already drawn up in battle order. “O Muslims,” he said, and then he twice 
pronounced the Divine Name, Allah, Allah. “Will ye act,” he went on, “as 
in the days of Ignorance, what though I am with you, and God hath guided 
you unto Islam, and honoured you with it, and thereby enabled you to 


1 I.I.361. 



128 Muhammad 


break with pagan ways, and thereby saved you from disbelief, and thereby 
united your hearts?” At once they realised that they had been led astray, 
and they wept, and embraced each other, and returned with the Prophet to 
the city, attentive and obedient to his words. 1 

In order to unite the community of believers still further, the Prophet 
now instituted a pact of brotherhood between the Helpers and the 
Emigrants, so that each of the Helpers would have an Emigrant brother 
who was nearer to him than any of the Helpers, and each Emigrant would 
have a Helper brother who was nearer to him than any Emigrant. But he 
made himself and his family an exception, for it would have been too 
invidious for him to choose as his brother one of the Helpers rather than 
another, so he took ‘All by the hand and said: “This is my brother”; and he 
made Hamzah the brother of Zayd. 

Among the chief adversaries to Islam were two cousins, the sons of two 
sisters, but of Aws and of Khazraj through their fathers, each being of great 
influence in his tribe. The man of Aws, Abu ‘Amir, was sometimes called 
“the Monk” because he had long been an ascetic and had been known to 
wear a garment of hair. He claimed to be of the religion of Abraham, and 
had acquired a certain religious authority amongst the people of Yathrib. 
He came to the Prophet soon after his arrival, ostensibly to ask him about 
the new religion. He was answered in the words of the Revelation which 
had more than once defined it as the religion of Abraham . 1 “But I am of it,” 
said Abu ‘Amir, and persisting in the face of denial he accused the Prophet 
of having falsified the Abrahamic faith. “I have not,” said the Prophet, 
“but I have brought it white and pure.” “May God let the liar die a lonely 
outcast exile!” said Abu ‘Amir. “So be it!” said the Prophet. “May God do 
that unto him who is lying!” 3 

Abu ‘Amir soon saw that his authority was rapidly losing weight; and he 
was still further embittered by his son Hanzalah’s devotion to the Prophet. 
It was not long before he decided to take his remaining followers, about ten 
in all, to Mecca, seemingly unaware that this was the beginning of his own 
self-imprecated exile. 

His cousin of Khazraj was ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy, who also felt himself 
to have been frustrated by the coming of the Prophet and robbed not of 
spiritual authority but of the chief temporal power in the Yathrib oasis. He 
likewise had the bitterness of seeing his own son ‘Abd Allah altogether 
won over by the Prophet, as well as his daughter Jamllah. But unlike Abu 
‘Amir, Ibn Ubayy was prepared to wait, thinking that sooner or later the 
newcomer’s overwhelming influence would begin to ebb. Meantime it was 
his policy to be as non-committal as possible, but he sometimes betrayed 
his feelings despite himself. 

One such occasion was when another chief of Khazraj, Sa‘d ibn 
‘Ubadah, was ill and the Prophet went to visit him. All the rich men of the 
oasis had their houses built as fortresses, and on his way he passed by 
Muzaham, the fortress of Ibn Ubayy, who was sitting in the shadow of its 
walls surrounded by some of his clansmen and other men of Khazraj. Out 
of courtesy to this chieftain, the Prophet dismounted from his ass and 

1 I.I.386. 2 11,135. 3 I. 1 .411-12. 



Harmony and Discord 129 

going to greet him sat for a while in his company, reciting the Koran and 
inviting him to Islam. When he had said all that he felt moved to say, Ibn 
Ubayy turned to him and said: “Naught could be better than this discourse 
of thine, were it but true. Sit then at home, in thine own house, and whoso 
cometh unto thee, preach unto him thus, but whoso cometh not, burden 
him not with thy talk, nor enter into his gathering with that which he liketh 
not.” “Nay,” said a voice, “come unto us with it, and visit us in our 
gatherings and our quarters and our houses, for that do we love, and that 
hath God given us of His Bounty, and thereunto hath He guided us.” The 
speaker was ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah, a man whom Ibn Ubayy had 
thought he could count on for support at every turn. The disappointed 
chieftain now sullenly uttered a verse to the effect that when one is deserted 
by one’s friends one is bound to be overcome. He had learned more clearly 
than ever that it was useless to resist. As to the Prophet, he went away 
deeply saddened, despite ‘Abd Allah’s glowing tribute; and when he 
entered the sick man’s house the rebuff he had received was still as it were 
written on his face. Sa‘d immediately asked what was troubling him, and 
when he was told about Ibn Ubayy’s impenetrable disbelief he said: “Deal 
gently with him, O Messenger of God, for when God brought thee unto us, 
even then were we fashioning for him a diadem wherewith to crown him; 
and he seeth that thou hast robbed him of a kingdom.” 

The Prophet never forgot these words; and as to Ibn Ubayy, he soon 
saw that his influence, once so great, was rapidly dwindling and that if he 
did not enter Islam it would vanish altogether. On the other hand he knew 
that a nominal acceptance of Islam would confirm him in his authority, for 
the Arabs were averse to breaking their old ties of allegiance unless there 
was a great reason for doing so. It was therefore not long before he decided 
to enter Islam; but although he formally pledged himself to the Prophet 
and regularly thereafter attended the prayers, the believers never came to 
feel sure of him. There were others about whom they were equally 
doubtful, but Ibn Ubayy was different from the majority of lukewarm or 
insincere converts by reason of his far-reaching influence, which made him 
all the more dangerous. 

During the first months, while the Mosque was still being built, the 
community suffered a great loss in the death of As‘ad, the first man in the 
oasis to pledge himself to the Prophet. It was he who had been the host of 
Mus‘ab, and who had worked so closely with him during the year between 
the two ‘Aqabahs. The Prophet said: “The Jews and the Arab hypocrites 
will surely say of me: ‘If he were a Prophet, his companion would not have 
died.’ And indeed my will availeth nothing for myself or for my companion 
against the Will of God.” 1 

It was perhaps at the funeral of As‘ad that the second meeting of Salman 
the Persian with the Prophet took place, for Salman himself described this 
meeting in later years to the son of ‘Abbas, saying: “I went to the 
Messenger of God when he was in the BaqI al-Gharqad, 2 whither he had 
followed the bier of one of his Companions.” Salman had known he would 


1 I.I.346. 2 The cemetery at the south-east end of Medina. 



130 Muhammad 

be there, and he contrived to absent himself from his work in time to reach 
the cemetery after the burial, while the Prophet was still sitting there with 
some of the Emigrants and the Helpers. “I greeted him,” said Salman, “and 
then I circled round behind him in the hope that I might be able to look 
upon the Seal. And he knew what I desired, so he grasped his cloak and 
threw it off his back, and I beheld the Seal of Prophecy even as my Master 
had described it unto me. I stooped over it and kissed it and wept. Then the 
Messenger of God bade me come round and I went and sat in front of him 
and told him my story, and he was glad that his Companions should hear 
it. Then I entered Islam.” 1 But Salman was kept hard at work as a slave 
among the Bani Qurayzah, and for the next four years he was able to have 
little contact with his fellow Muslims. 

Another man of the people of the Book who embraced Islam at this time 
was a rabbi of the Bani Qaynuqa’, Husayn ibn Sallam. He came to the 
Prophet in secret and pledged allegiance to him. The Prophet thereupon 
gave him the name ‘Abd Allah, and the new convert suggested that before 
his Islam became known his people should be questioned about his 
standing amongst them. The Prophet concealed him in his house and sent 
for some of the leading men of Qaynuqa’. “He is our chief,” they said in 
answer to his question, “and the son of our chief; he is our rabbi and our 
man of learning.” Then ‘Abd Allah came out to them and said: “O Jews, 
fear God, and accept that which He hath sent unto you, for ye know that 
this man is the Messenger of God.” Then he affirmed his own Islam and 
that of his household; and his people reviled him, and denied his good 
standing amongst them which they had previously affirmed. 

Islam was now firmly established in the oasis. The Revelation prescribed 
the giving of alms and the fast of the month of Ramadan, and laid down in 
general what was forbidden and what was allowed. The five daily ritual 
prayers were regularly performed in congregation, and when the time for 
each prayer came the people would assemble at the site where the Mosque 
was being built. Everyone judged of the time by the position of the sun in 
the sky, or by the first signs of its light on the eastern horizon or by the 
dimming of its glow in the west after sunset; but opinions could differ, and 
the Prophet felt the need for a means of summoning the people to prayer 
when the right time had come. At first he thought of appointing a man to 
blow a horn like that of the Jews, but later he decided on a wooden clapper, 
naqiis, such as the Oriental Christians used at that time, and two pieces of 
wood were fashioned together for that purpose. But they were never 
destined to be used; for one night a man of Khazraj, ‘Abd Allah ibn Zayd, 
who had been at the Second ‘Aqabah, had a dream which the next day he 
recounted to the Prophet: “There passed by me a man wearing two green 
garments and he carried in his hand a naqiis , so I said unto him: “O slave of 
God, wilt thou sell me that naqiis ?” “What wilt thou do with it?” he said. 
“We will summon the people to prayer with it,” I answered. “Shall I not 
show thee a better way?” he said. “What way is that?” I asked, and he 
answered: “That thou shouldst say: God is most Great, Allahu Akbar .” 
The man in green repeated this magnification four times, then each of the 


1 . 1 . i 4 i;I.S. IV, 56. 



Harmony and Discord 131 

following twice: I testify that there is no god but God; I testify that 
Muhammad is the messenger of God; come unto the prayer; come unto 
salvation; God is most Great ; and then once again there is no god but God. 

The Prophet said that this was a true vision, and he told him to go to 
Bilal, who had an excellent voice, and teach him the words exactly as he 
had heard them in his sleep. The highest house in the neighbourhood of the 
Mosque belonged to a woman of the clan of Najjar, and Bilal would come 
there before every dawn and would sit on the roof waiting for the 
daybreak. When he saw the first faint light in the east he would stretch out 
his arms and say in supplication: “O God I praise Thee, and I ask Thy Help 
for Quraysh, that they may accept Thy religion.” Then he would stand and 
utter the call to prayer. 



XL 


The New 
Household 

W HEN the Mosque was nearly finished the Prophet gave orders 
for two small dwellings to be attached to its eastern wall, one for 
his wife Sawdah and the other for his bethrothed, ‘A’ishah.'The 
building had taken altogether seven months, and during that time he 
lodged with Abu Ayyub. But when Sawdah’s house was nearly ready he 
sent Zayd to bring her to Medina, and with her* Umm Kulthum and 
Fatimah; and Abu Bakr sent word to his son ‘Abd Allah to bring Umm 
Ruman, Asma’ and ‘A’ishah. At the same time Zayd brought his own wife 
Umm Ayman and their small son Usamah. Talhah also travelled with 
them, having disposed of all his immovable property, and making now his 
Hijrah . Not long after the arrival of the party, Abu Bakr gave Asma’ in 
marriage to Zubayr, who with his mother Safiyyah had already been some 
months in Medina. Abu Bakr’s sister Quraybah remained in Mecca to take 
care of their father, Abu Quhafah, who was old and blind. Unlike 
Quraybah, he had not yet entered Islam. 

The Prophet now decided that in addition to Umm Ayman Zayd should 
have a second wife, one nearer his own age, and he asked his cousin ‘Abd 
Allah, the son of Jahsh, for the hand of his beautiful sister Zaynab. At first 
Zaynab was unwilling, and she had reason to be so, as events were to 
disclose. The reason she gave, namely that she was a woman of Quraysh, 
was not convincing. Her mother, Umaymah, of pure Quraysh stock on 
both sides, had married a man of Asad; and quite apart from Zayd’s 
adoption into Quraysh, it could not be said that the tribes of his parents, 
the Bani Kalb and the Bani Tayy, were inferior to the Bani Asad. When she 
saw that it was the Prophet’s desire that she should marry Zayd, she 
consented, and the marriage took place. About the same time her sister 
Hamnah was given in marriage to Mus‘ab. Not long afterwards 
Umaymah came to Medina and pledged allegiance to the Prophet. 

The Prophet and his daughters now went to live with Sawdah in her new 
house; and after a month or two it was decided that ‘A’ishah’s wedding 
should take place. She was then only nine years old, a child of remarkable 
beauty, as might have been expected from her parentage. Quraysh had 
given her father the name of ‘Atlq, and some said that this was on account 
of his fine face. 1 Of her mother the Prophet had said: “Whoso would 


1 I.H.161. 



The New Household 133 


behold a woman of the wide-eyed Hurls of Paradise, let him look on Umm 
Ruman.” 1 To ‘A’ishah the Prophet had long been very near and very dear, 
and she had been accustomed to see him every day, except during those few 
months when he and her father had already emigrated and she and her 
mother were still in Mecca. From her earliest years she had seen her father 
and mother treat him with such love and reverence as they gave to no one 
else. Nor had they failed to impress upon her the reasons for this: she knew 
well that he was the Messenger of God, that he had regular converse with 
the Angel Gabriel, and that he was unique amongst living men in that he 
had ascended to Heaven and returned from thence to earth. His very 
presence told of that ascent, and communicated something of the joy of 
Paradise. In his miraculous touch this joy was even tangible. When others 
were overcome by the heat, his hand would be “cooler than snow and 
more fragrant than musk”. 2 He seemed, moreover, ageless, like an immor¬ 
tal. His eyes had lost nothing of their lustre, his black hair and beard had 
still the sheen of youth and his body had the grace of a man whose age was 
only the half of those fifty-three years which had passed since the Year of 
the Elephant. 

Small preparations were made for the wedding — not enough, at any rate 
for ‘A’ishah to have had the sense of a great and solemn occasion, and 
shortly before they were due to leave the house she had slipped out into the 
courtyard to play with a passing friend. In her own words: “I was playing 
on a see-saw and my long streaming hair was dishevelled. They came and 
took me from my play and made me ready.” 3 

Abu Bakr had bought some fine red-striped cloth from Bahrain and it 
had been made into a wedding-dress for her. In this they now clothed her. 
Then her mother took her to the newly built house where some women of 
the Helpers were waiting for her outside the door. They greeted her with 
the words “For good and for happiness - may all be well!” and led her into 
the presence of the Prophet. He stood there smiling while they combed her 
hair and decked her with ornaments. Unlike his other marriages, at this 
there was no wedding feast. The occasion was as simple as possible. A 
bowl of milk was brought and having drunk from it himself, he offered it 
to her. She shyly declined it, but when he pressed her to drink she did so, 
and offered the bowl to her sister Asma’ who was sitting beside her. Others 
also drank of it; then they all went their ways, and the bridegroom and 
bride were left together. 

_ For the last three years scarcely a day had passed without one or more of 
‘A’ishah’s friends coming to play with her in the courtyard adjoining her 
father’s house. Her removal to the Prophet’s house changed nothing in this 
respect. Friends now came every day to visit her in her own appartment — 
new friends made since her arrival in Medina and also some of the old ones 
whose parents, like hers, had emigrated. “I would be playing with my 
dolls,” she said, “with the girls who were my friends, and the Prophet 
would come in and they would steal out of the house and he would go out 
after them and bring them back, for he was pleased for my sake to have 
them there.” 4 Sometimes he would say “Stay where ye are” 5 before they 

1 l.S. VII, 202.. 2 B.LXI,22. 3 i.s. VIII, 40-1. 

4 I.S. VIII, 42. s ibid., 41. 



i34 Muhammad 

had time to move. He would also join in their games sometimes, for he 
loved children and had often played with his own daughters. The dolls or 
puppets had many different roles. “One day,” said ‘A’ishah, “the Prophet 
came in when I was playing with the dolls and he said: ‘O ‘A’ishah, 
whatever game is this?’ I said: ‘It is Solomon’s horses’, and he laughed.” 1 
But sometimes as he came in he would simply screen himself with his cloak 
so as not to disturb them. 

‘A’ishah’s life had also its more serious side. Yathrib was well known 
throughout Arabia as a place where at certain seasons there was a great 
danger of fever, especially for those who were not native to the oasis. The 
Prophet himself escaped the fever, but it severely attacked many of his 
Companions including Abu Bakr and his two freedmen ‘Amir and Bilal, 
who were at that time living with him. One morning ‘A’ishah went to visit 
her father, and was dismayed to find the three men lying prostrate in an 
extremity of weakness. “How dost thou, my father?” she said, but he was 
too ill to adjust his reply to a girl of nine, and he answered her with two 
lines of poetry: 

“Each man each morn his kindred greet good day, 

And death is nearer than his sandal’s thong.” 

She thought he did not know what he was saying a,nd turned to ‘Amir, who 
also answered her in verse, to the effect that without actually dying he had 
been near enough to death to know what it was like. Meantime the fever 
had left Bilal, though he was still too weak to do anything but lie in the 
courtyard of the house. But his voice had enough strength in it for him to 
chant: 

“Ah, shall I ever sleep the night again 

Midst thyme and nard that outside Mecca grow, 

And shall I drink the waters of Majannah , 2 
And see before me Shamah and TafTl ?” 3 

‘A’ishah returned home deeply troubled. “They are raving,” she said, 
“out of their minds, through the heat of the fever.” But the Prophet was 
somewhat reassured when with the retentive memory of a child she 
repeated almost word for word the lines which they had uttered and which 
she had not fully understood. It was on that occasion that he prayed: “O 
God, make Medina as dear unto us as thou hast made Mecca, or even 
dearer. And bless for us its waters and its grain, and carry away from it its 
fever as far as Mahya‘ah. 4 ” 5 And God answered his prayer. 

1 ibid., 4z. 1 A place near Mecca. 3 Two hills of Mecca. 

4 A place about seven camel days south of Medina. 5 I.I. 414. 



XLI 


The Threshold of 
War 


P ERMISSION to fight is given unto those who fight because they 
have been wronged; and God is Able to give them victory. Those 
who have been driven from their homes unjustly, for no cause other 
than for their saying: Our Lord is Godd The Prophet had received this 
Revelation not long after his arrival in Medina. He knew moreover that 
permission was here a command, and the obligations of war had been 
stressed in the covenant with the Jews. But for the moment there could be 
no question of anything but raids. Quraysh were vulnerable in their 
caravans, and it was especially in the spring and early summer months, 
when their trade with Syria was most active, that they lay open to attack 
from Medina. In the autumn and winter they sent most of their caravans to 
the south, mainly to the Yemen and to Abyssinia. 

The information received in Medina about the caravans was seldom 
very precise, and there were liable to be last-minute changes of plan. The 
Meccan caravans altogether eluded some of the first raids from Medina, 
but the Muslims succeeded none the less in making treaties with Bedouin 
tribes at strategic points along the coast of the Red Sea. 

When the Prophet went out himself he appointed one of his Compan¬ 
ions to be in charge of Medina during his absence, and the first to have this 
honour was the Khazrajite chief, Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah. That was eleven 
months after the Hijrah; until then the Prophet himself took no part in the 
expeditions, and on each occasion when he remained behind he gave the 
leader a white banner mounted on a lance. For the first year he sent out 
only those of his Companions who were Emigrants; but in September 623 
news came that a rich Meccan caravan was returning from the north under 
the escort of Umayyah, the chief of Jumah, with a hundred armed men. 
Umayyah had always been one of the fiercest enemies of Islam; and 
another reason for attack was the prize itself. The merchandise at stake 
was said to have been loaded on to as many as 2,500 camels. But the 
Emigrants alone would have been no match for a hundred Quraysh, so on 
this occasion the Prophet set out with two hundred men, over half of 
whom were Helpers. Once again, however, the information had been 


XXII, 39-40. 



136 Muhammad 

inadequate and there was no encounter. They also missed, some three 
months after that, another rich caravan, less heavily guarded, which the 
Shamsite Abu Sufyan was conducting to Syria. News of it had come too 
late, and when the Prophet and his men reached ‘Ushayrah in the valley of 
Yanbu‘, which opens out on to the Red Sea south-west of Medina, the 
caravan had already passed. But Abu Sufyan would soon be returning 
from Syria, perhaps with an even richer load, and then, if God willed, they 
would not fail to waylay him. 

Although no fighting had taken place as yet, Quraysh were already alert 
to the danger of having an enemy established in Yathrib. But it seemed to 
them that this would in no way affect their trade with the south. They were 
soon to be disillusioned, for the Prophet now received word of a caravan 
that was on its way from the Yemen, and he sent his cousin ‘Abd Allah ibn 
Jahsh with eight other Emigrants to lie in wait for it near Nakhlah, 
between Ta’if and Mecca. It was Rajab, one of the four sacred months of 
the year, and the Prophet gave ‘Abd Allah no instructions to attack the 
caravan but simply to bring him news of it. No doubt he wished to see how 
well the southern caravans were guarded, for future activity against them. 

Soon after the Emigrants reached their destination and had camped at a 
point of vantage not far from the main route, a small caravan of Quraysh 
passed by them and then stopped and camped nearby, unaware of their 
presence. The camels were laden with raisins and leather and other 
merchandise. ‘Abd Allah and his companions were in a dilemma: the 
Prophet’s only definite instructions had been to bring him news; but he had 
not forbidden them to fight, nor had he made mention of the sacred month. 
Were these pre-Islamic conventions still binding, they asked themselves. 
They thought also of the Revelation: Permission to fight is given unto those 
who fight because they have been wronged . . . those who have been 
unjustly driven from their homes? They were at war with Quraysh, and 
they had recognised at least two of the merchants in the caravan as men of 
Makhzum, which of all the clans of Mecca had shown itself most hostile to 
Islam. It was the morning of the last day of Rajab; sunset would bring in 
Sha‘ban, which was not a sacred month, but by that time, though no longer 
protected by the calendar, their enemies would be protected by distance, 
for they would have reached the sacred precinct; and after much hesitation 
they decided to attack. Their first arrow killed a man of Kindah, a 
confederate of the clan of ‘Abdu Shams, wereupon ‘Uthman, one of the 
men of Makhzum, and Hakam, a freedman, surrendered, though ‘Uth- 
man’s brother Nawfal escaped to Mecca. 

‘Abd Allah and his men took their prisoners and the camels and the 
merchandise back to Medina. He set aside a fifth part of the spoils for the 
Prophet, dividing the rest among his companions and himself. But the 
Prophet refused to accept anything and said: “I did not bid you fight in the 
sacred month,” whereupon those who had done so thought they were 
doomed. Their brethren in Medina blamed them for their violation of 
Rajab, while the Jews said it was a bad omen for the Prophet, and Quraysh 
set about spreading far and wide the news that Muhammad was guilty of 


1 XXII, 39. 



The Threshold of War 137 

sacrilege. Then came the Revelation: They question thee about the sacred 
month and fighting therein. Say: to fight therein is a grave offence; but 
barring men from God’s path and sacrilege against Him and the holy 
mosque and driving out His people therefrom are graver with God. And 
torturing is graver than killing . 1 

The Prophet interpreted this as confirming the traditional ban on 
warfare in the sacred month but as making an exception in this particular 
case, so he relieved ‘Abd Allah and his companions of the fear that lay so 
heavily upon them and accepted a fifth of the spoils for the general benefit 
of the community. The clan of Makhzum sent ransoms for the two 
prisoners, but Hakam their freedman chose to enter Islam and remain in 
Medina, so ‘Uthman returned alone. 

It was in this same moon of Sha‘ban that there came a Revelation of 
great ritual importance. Its opening words refer to the Prophet’s extreme 
care to face in the right direction for prayer. In the Mosque the direction 
was set by the Mihrab, the prayer-niche in the Jerusalem wall; but when he 
was outside the town he would check his direction by the sun if it were day 
and by the stars at night. 

We have seen the turning of thy face unto the sky; and now We shall turn 
thee a way that shall well please thee. So turn thou thy face towards the 
Inviolable Mosque; and wheresoever ye may be , turn ye your faces 
toward it . 2 

A Mihrab was forthwith made in the south wall of the Mosque, facing 
towards Mecca, and the change was accepted with joy by the Prophet and 
his Companions. From that day Muslims have turned in the direction of 
the Ka'bah for the performance of the ritual prayer, and by extension for 
other rites. 


1 11,117. 


2 11,144. 



XLII 

The March to Badr 

T HE time was now at hand for Abu Sufyan to return with all the wares 
that he and his fellows had acquired in Syria. The Prophet sent 
Talhah and ‘Umar’s cousin Sa‘ld — the son of Zayd the Hanlf - to 
Hawra’ on the sea-shore due west of Medina to bring him news as soon as 
the caravan arrived. This would enable him, by a quick march to the 
south-west, to overtake it further down the coast. His two scouts were 
hospitably received by a chief of Juhaynah who hid them in his house until 
the caravan had passed. But he and they might have spared themselves 
their pains, for someone in Medina, no doubt one of the hypocrites or one 
of the Jews, had already sent word of the Prophet’s plans to Abu Sufyan, 
who immediately hired a man of the Ghifari tribe, Damdam by name, to go 
with all speed to Mecca and urge Quraysh to march out at once with an 
army to their rescue, while he himself pressed forward along the coastal 
route, travelling by both day and night. 

But his was not the only sense of urgency. The Prophet had his reasons 
for wishing to remain in Medina as long as possible, for his beloved 
daughter Ruqayyah had fallen seriously ill. But personal considerations 
could not be taken into account, and rather than risk being too late he 
decided not even to wait for the return of his scouts. By the time they 
reached Medina he had already set out with an army of Emigrants and 
Helpers, three hundred and five men altogether. At that time there were 
seventy-seven able-bodied Emigrants in Medina and all these were present 
on this occasion except three: the Prophet had told his son-in-law ‘Uthman 
to stay at home and tend his sick wife; the other two were Talhah and 
Sa‘id, who arrived back from the coast too late to set out. 

At the first halt, which was still in the oasis, the Prophet’s cousin Sa‘d of 
Zuhrah noticed his fifteen-year-old brother ‘Umayr looking troubled and 
furtive and he asked him what was the matter. “I am afraid,” said ‘Umayr, 
“that the Messenger of God will see me and say I am too young and send 
me back. And I long to go forth. It might be that God would grant me 
martyrdom.” As he feared, the Prophet noticed him when he lined up the 
troops and said he was too young and told him to go home. But ‘Umayr 
wept and the Prophet let him stay and take part in the expedition. “He was 
so young”, said Sa‘d, “that I had to fasten the straps of his sword-belt for 
him.” 

There were seventy camels which the men rode by turns, three or four 
men to one camel, and three horses, one of which belonged to Zubayr. 
The white banner was given to Mus‘ab, no doubt because he was of the 



The March to Badr 139 

clan of ‘Abd ad-Dar, whose ancestral right it was to carry the banner of 
Quraysh in war. After the vanguard came the Prophet himself, preceded by 
two black pennants, one for the Emigrants and one for the Helpers. These 
were borne respectively by ‘All and Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh of Aws. During the 
Prophet’s absence from Medina, the prayers were to be led by Ibn Umm 
Maktum, the blind man referred to in the Revelation He frowned and 
turned away when the blind man came unto him} 

In Mecca, shortly before the arrival of Damdam, the Prophet’s aunt 
‘Atikah had a dream which terrified her and left her with a conviction of 
impending disaster for Quraysh. She sent for her brother ‘Abbas and told 
him what she had seen: “I saw a man riding a camel and he halted in the 
valley and cried at the top of his voice: ‘Haste ye forth, O men of perfidy, 
unto a disaster that in three days shall lay you prostrate.’ I saw the people 
gather round him. Then he entered the Mosque with the people following 
him, and from out of their midst his camel carried him up to the roof of the 
Ka‘bah, and again he cried out the same words. Then his camel bore him to 
the top of Mount Abu Qubays, and yet again he cried out to the people as 
before. Then he wrenched free a rock and sent it hurtling down the slope, 
and when it reached the foot of the mount it split into fragments, nor was 
there any house or any dwelling in Mecca but was smitten with a piece of 
it.” 

‘Abbas recounted his sister’s dream to ‘Utbah’s son, Walid, who was his 
friend, and Walid told his father, and the news spread throughout the city. 
The next day Abu Jahl exclaimed in the presence of ‘Abbas, with gleeful 
mockery: “O sons of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, since when hath this prophetess 
been uttering her prophecies amongst you? Is it not enough for you that 
your men should play the prophet? And must your women do the same?” 
‘Abbas could not find a rejoinder, but Abu Jahl had his answer the next 
day, when the crags of Abu Qubays resounded with the powerful voice of 
Damdam. The people streamed out of their houses and out of the Mosque 
to where he had halted in the valley. Abu Sufyan had paid him handsome¬ 
ly, and he was determined to play his part well. He had turned round his 
saddle and was seated with his back to his camel’s head; and in further sign 
of calamity he had slit his camel’s nose, so that the blood poured forth from 
it, and he had rent his own shirt to ribbons. “Men of Quraysh,” he 
shouted, “the transport camels, the transport camels! Your goods which 
are with Abu Sufyan! Muhammad and his companions are upon them! 
Help! Help!” 

The town was immediately in an uproar. The caravan now in danger 
was one of the richest of the year, and many were those who had reason to 
fear the loss of it. An army of about a thousand men was quickly mustered. 
“Do Muhammad and his fellows think that this will be as the caravan of 
Ibn al-Hadraml?” they said, referring to ‘Amr, the confederate of ‘Abdu 
Shams who had been killed by an arrow in the sacred month at Nakhlah. 
The clan of ‘Adi were alone in not taking part in the expedition. Every 
other chief of clan led out a contingent except Abu Lahab, who sent in his 
own stead a man of Makhzum who owed him money. But the Bani Hashim 


Seep. 6 4. 



140 Muhammad 

and the Bani 1 -Muttalib had none the less their interests in the caravan and 
felt in honour bound to defend it, so Talib led out a body of men from both 
clans, and ‘Abbas went with them, perhaps intending to act as peace¬ 
maker. Hakim of Asad, Khadljah’s nephew, went out with the same 
purpose. Like Abu Lahab, Umayyah of Jumah had also decided to stay at 
home, for he was an elderly man of excessive corpulence; but while he was 
sitting in the Mosque ‘Uqbah came to him with a censer of incense which 
he placed before him, saying: “Scent thyself with that, Abu ‘All, for thou 
art of the women.” “God curse thee,” said Umayyah, and made ready to 
set out with the others. 

The Prophet had by now left the direct route from Medina to the 
south and was making for Badr, which lay on the coastal route from 
Syria to Mecca, to his west. It was at Badr that he hoped to waylay Abu 
Sufyan, and he sent ahead two of their allies of Juhaynah, who knew the 
district well, to scout for news of the caravan. At Badr they halted on a hill 
above the well, and when they went to draw water they overheard a 
conversation between two girls from the village about a debt. “The 
caravan will come tomorrow or the next day,” said one to the other, “and I 
will work for them and pay thee what I owe thee.” When they heard these 
words they made haste back to the Prophet with the news. But if they had 
stayed a little longer they would have seen a solitary rider approaching the 
well from the west. It was Abu Sufyan himself, who had hastened ahead of 
the caravan in order to see whether it was safe to proceed to Mecca by the 
nearest route, that is by Badr. On reaching the water he found a villager 
there and asked him if he had seen any strangers. He answered that he had 
seen two riders who had made a halt on the hill above and who had then 
drawn some water and taken it away with them. Abu Sufyan went to their 
halting-place and took up some of the camel dung which he broke into 
pieces. There were some date stones in it. “By God,” he said, “this is the 
fodder of Yathrib.” He hastened back to his followers, and turning the 
caravan away from the road they pressed on at full speed along the shore 
by the sea, leaving Badr on their left. 

Meantime the two scouts returned to the Prophet with the news that the 
caravan was expected to reach Badr on the following day or the day after. 
They would certainly stop at Badr, which had long been one of the great 
halts on the road between Mecca and Syria, and there was ample time for 
the Muslims to surprise them and overpower them. 

Then came the news that Quraysh had set out with an army to rescue 
their caravan. This had always been considered as a possibility, but now 
that it had become a fact the Prophet felt bound to consult his men and to 
let theirs be the choice between advancing and retreating. Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar spoke for the Emigrants in favour of advancing and then, by way of 
confirmation of all that they had said, an ally of the Bani Zuhrah who had 
only recently come to Medina, Miqdad by name, rose to his feet and 
added: “O Messenger of God, do what God hath shown thee to do. We 
will not say unto thee as the children of Israel said unto Moses: Go thou 
and thy Lord and fight; we shall sit here , 1 but we will say: ‘Go thou and thy 


1 K. V, 14. 



The March to Badr 141 

Lord and fight, and with you we also will fight, on the right and on the left, 
before thee and behind thee. 5 ” ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud used to tell in after 
years of the great light that dawned on the Prophet’s face when he heard 
those words and as he blessed their speaker. Not that he was surprised, for 
he knew that the Emigrants were unreservedly with him. But could the 
same be said of all the Helpers who were now present? The army had set 
out from Medina in hope of capturing the caravan. But now it seemed that 
they might have to encounter something much more formidable. More¬ 
over, when the Helpers had pledged allegiance to him in ‘Aqabah, they had 
said that they were not responsible for his safety until he had entered their 
territory, but that when he was with them they would protect him as they 
protected their wives and their children. Would they be prepared to help 
him against an enemy now that he was no longer in Yathrib? “Men, give 
me your advice,” he said, expressing himself in general but meaning the 
Helpers, some of whom had already divined his thoughts, though none of 
them had yet spoken. But now Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh rose to his feet. “It would 
seem,” he said, “that we are the men thou meanest, O Messenger of God.” 
And when the Prophet assented he went on: “We have faith in thee and we 
believe what thou hast told us, and we testify that what thou hast brought 
us is the truth, and we have given thee our binding oaths to hear and obey. 
So do what thou wilt, and we are with thee. By Him who hath sent thee 
with the truth, if thou shouldst bid us cross yonder sea and didst plunge 
into it thyself, we would plunge into it with thee. Not one man of us 
would stay behind. Neither are we averse from meeting our enemy to¬ 
morrow. We are well tried in war, trusty in combat. It may be that God 
will show thee prowess of ours such as shall bring coolness to thine eyes. 1 
So lead us on with the blessing of God.” 

The Prophet rejoiced at his words; and the certainty came to him that 
they would indeed have to contend with either the army or the caravan but 
not with both. “Onwards,” he said, “and be of good cheer, for God the All 
Highest hath promised me one of the two parties, and even now it is as if I 
saw the enemy lying prostrate.” 2 

Although they were prepared for the worst, there was still hope that they 
would be able to attack the caravan and be well on their way back to 
Medina, enriched with plunder and prisoners, before the army of Quraysh 
arrived. But when they had reached a halt that was less than a day’s march 
from Badr, the Prophet rode on with Abu Bakr and obtained some 
information from an old man from which he concluded that the Meccan 
army was already near. Returning to the camp he waited until nightfall and 
sent his three cousins ‘All, Zubayr and Sa‘d with some others of his 
companions to the well of Badr to see if either the army or the caravan or 
both had drawn water from it, or if anyone there had had any news of 
either party. At the well they chanced upon two men who were loading 
their camels with water for the army of Quraysh, and having overpowered 
them they brought them back to the Prophet, who was standing in prayer 
when they arrived. Without waiting until he had finished they began to 

' “Coolness of the eyes” is a favourite term of the Arabs for expressing joy, delight, etc. 

2 U. 43 J- 



142 Muhammad 

question the two men, who said that they were the army’s water-carriers. 
But some of their interrogators preferred to think that they were lying, for 
they fervently hoped that it was Abu Sufyan who had sent them to get 
water for the caravan, and they set about beating them, until they said “We 
are Abu Sufyan’s men,” and they let them be. The Prophet made the 
concluding prostrations to his prayer and gave the greetings of peace, and 
said: “When they told you the truth, ye beat them, and when they lied ye let 
them be. They are indeed of the army of Quraysh.” Then he turned to the 
two prisoners. “Tell me, ye two,” he said, “of Quraysh, of their where¬ 
abouts.” “They are behind this hill,” they said, pointing to ‘Aqanqal, “on 
the further slope of the valley beyond it.” “How many men are they?” he 
asked. “Many,” they said, nor could they answer anything more precise, 
so he asked how many beasts they slaughtered. “Some days nine, some 
days ten” was the answer. “Then they are between nine hundred and a 
thousand,” he said. “And what leaders of Quraysh are amongst them?” 
They named fifteen and these included, of ‘Abdu Shams, the brothers 
‘Utbah and Shaybah; of Nawfal, Harith and Tu‘aymah; of ‘Abd ad-Dar, 
Nadr, who had pitted his tales of Persia against the Koran; of Asad, 
Khadljah’s half brother Nawfal; of Makhzum, Abu Jahl; of Jumah, 
Umayyah; of ‘Amir, Suhayl. Hearing these eminent names, the Prophet 
remarked when he rejoined his men: “This Mecca hath thrown unto you 
the best morsels of her liver.” 

It was not long before news of the thousand-strong army reached Abu 
Sufyan, and by that time he had reached a point from which his rescuers 
were between him and the enemy. Realising that the caravan was now safe, 
he sent a messenger to Quraysh, saying: “Ye came out to defend your 
camels and your men and your goods; and God hath rescued them, 
therefore return.” This message reached them when they were already 
encamped at Juhfah, a little to the south of Badr. There was yet another 
reason why they should advance no further. Gloom had been cast over the 
whole camp on account of a dream — almost a vision - that Juhaym, a man 
of Muttalib, had had. “Between sleeping and waking,” he said, “I saw a 
man approach on horseback, leading a camel. Then he halted and said 
‘Slain are ‘Utbah and Shaybah and Abu ’ 1 -Hakam and Umayyah’” - and 
he went on to mention other chiefs of Quraysh that the horseman had 
named. “Then,” said Juhaym, “I saw him stab his camel in the chest and let 
it run loose through the camp, and there was no tent that was not 
bespattered with its blood.” When Abu Jahl was told of this he said in a 
tone of triumphant derision: “Here is yet another prophet from the sons of 
Muttalib.” He said “yet another” because the two clans of Muttalib and 
Hashim were often thought of as one. Then, seeking to dispel the gloom, he 
addressed them all: “By God, we will not return until we have been at 
Badr. Three days will we stay there; we will slaughter camels and feast and 
make flow the wine and the songstresses shall play and sing for us; and the 
Arabs will hear how we marched forth and of our mighty gathering, and 
they will stand in awe of us for ever. Onwards to Badr!” 

Akhnas ibn Shariq had come out with Zuhrah, whose confederate he 
was, and he now urged them to pay no attention to Abu Jahl, so they 
returned from Juhfah to Mecca, every man of them. Talib also returned 



The March to Badr 143 

with some of his fellow clansmen, for words had passed between him and 
others of Quraysh who had said: “O sons of Hashim, we know that even 
though ye have come out with us, your hearts are with Muhammad.” But 
‘Abbas decided to go on to Badr with the rest of the army, and he took with 
him his three nephews, Abu Sufyan and Nawfal, the sons of Harith, and 
‘Aqll, the son of Abu Talib. 

Beyond the hill, a little to the north-east, the Muslims were breaking 
camp. The Prophet knew that it was imperative for them to reach the 
waters of Badr before the enemy, so he ordered an immediate advance. Not 
long after they had started rain began to fall, and he rejoiced in it as a sign 
of favour from God, a blessing and an assurance. It refreshed the men and 
laid the dust and made firm the soft sand of the valley of Yalyal where now 
they were marching; but it would impede the enemy, who had yet to climb 
the slopes of ‘Aqanqal, which lay over to the left of the Muslims, on the 
opposite side of the valley from Badr. The wells were all on the gentler 
slopes of the near side, and the Prophet ordered a halt at the first well they 
came to. But a man of Khazraj, Hubab ibn al-Mundhir, came to him and 
said: “O Messenger of God, this place where now we are - hath God 
revealed it unto thee, that we should neither advance nor retreat from it, or 
is it a matter of opinion and strategy of war?” He said that it was merely a 
matter of opinion, whereupon Hubab said: “This is not the place to halt, 
but take us on, O Messenger of God, until we come unto that one of the 
large wells which is nearest the enemy. Let us halt there and stop up the 
wells that lie beyond it and make for ourselves a cistern. Then will we fight 
the enemy, and all the water will be ours to drink, and they will have 
none.” The Prophet at once agreed, and Hubab’s plan was carried out in 
every detail. The further wells were stopped and the cistern was built, and 
every man filled his drinking vessel. 

Then Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh came to the Prophet and said: “O Prophet of 
God, let us build for thee a shelter and put thy riding camels in readiness 
beside it. Then will we meet our enemy, and if God strengthen us and make 
us victorious over them, that is what we fervently desire. But, if not, then 
thou canst mount and ride to join those whom we left behind us. For as to 
some of those who came not out with thee, O Prophet of God, even our 
love for thee is not greater than theirs, nor had they stayed behind, if they 
had known thou wouldst meet with war. Through them God will protect 
thee, and they will give thee good counsel and fight at thy side.” The 
Prophet praised him and invoked blessings upon him, and the shelter was 
fashioned with branches of palms. 

That night God sent down a peaceful sleep upon the believers, and they 
awoke refreshed. 1 It was Friday 17 March ad 623 which was 17 Ramadan 
in the year ah z . 2 As soon as it was dawn Quraysh marched forth and 
climbed the hill of ‘Aqanqal. The sun was already up when they reached 
the top, and when the Prophet saw them on their richly caparisoned 
horses and camels descending the slope into the valley of Yalyal towards 
Badr, he prayed: “O God, here are Quraysh: they have come in their 
arrogance and their vanity, opposing Thee and belying Thy messenger. O 


1 See K. VIII, 11. 2 Anno Hegirae. The Islamic era begins at the Hijrah. 



144 Muhammad 

Lord, grant us Thy help which Thou didst promise us! O Lord, this morn 
destroy them!” 

They made their camp at the foot of the slope; and since it appeared to 
them that the Muslims were fewer than they had anticipated they sent out 
‘Umayr of Jumah on horseback to estimate their numbers and to see if they 
had any reinforcements in their rear. He reported that there was no sign of 
any further troops other than those who were now facing them on the 
opposite side of the valley. “But O ye men of Quraysh,” he added, “I do 
not think that any man of them will be slain but he shall first have slain a 
man of you; and if they slay of you a number that is equal to their number, 
what good will be left in life thereafter?” ‘Umayr had something of the 
reputation of a diviner throughout Mecca, and this added weight to his 
words. No sooner had he spoken than Hakim of Asad, Khadljah’s 
nephew, seized his opportunity and went on foot through the camp until 
he came to the men of ‘Abdu Shams. “Father of Walid,” he said to ‘Utbah, 
“thou art the greatest man of Quraysh, and their lord and the one whom 
they obey. Wouldst thou be remembered with praise amongst them until 
the end of time?” “How shall that be?” said ‘Utbah. “Lead the men back,” 
said Hakim, “and take upon thyself the cause of thy slain confederate 
‘Amr.” He meant that ‘Utbah should eliminate one of the strong reasons 
for fighting and pay the blood-wite to the kinsmen of the man who had 
been killed at Nakhlah, whose brother ‘Amir had in fact come to take his 
revenge on the field of battle. ‘Utbah agreed to do all that he said, but urged 
him to go and speak to Abu Jahl, the man most likely to insist on war. 
Meantime he addressed the troops, saying: “Men of Quraysh, ye will gain 
naught by fighting Muhammad and his companions. If ye lay them low, 
each man of you will for ever look with loathing on the face of another who 
hath slain his uncle or his cousin or some yet nearer kinsman. Therefore 
turn back and leave Muhammad to the rest of the Arabs. If they slay him, 
that is what ye desire; and if not, he will find that ye have shown 
self-restraint towards him.” 

He no doubt intended to approach ‘Amir al-Hadrami at once with a 
view of paying the blood-wite for his brother, but Abu Jahl was too quick 
for him. He taunted ‘Utbah with cowardice, with being afraid of death for 
himself and also for his son Abu Hudhayfah, who was in the ranks of the 
enemy. Then he turned to ‘Amir and urged him not to let slip his 
opportunity of revenge for his brother. “Arise,” he said, “and remind them 
of thy covenant and of the slaying of thy brother.” ‘Amir leapt to his feet, 
and frantically stripping off his clothes, he began to utter cries of 
lamentation at the top of his voice. “Alas for ‘Amr! Alas for ‘Amr!” So the 
fire of war was kindled and men’s souls were filled with violence and it was 
in vain for ‘Utbah or anyone else to seek to turn them back. 

The now general absorbedness in final preparations for battle gave one 
man the chance he had been waiting for. Fearing that he might escape in his 
absence, Suhayl had brought his son ‘Abd Allah with him to Badr. 
Umayyah, chief of Jumah, had done the same with his son ‘All, whom he 
had coerced into forsaking Islam. But unlike ‘All, who was a waverer, ‘Abd 
Allah was unshakeable in his faith; and going out of sight of the camp 
behind a nearby hillock, he quickly made his way across the uneven sands 



The March to Badr 145 

to the Muslim camp, where he went straight to the Prophet, and joy was on 
both their faces. Then he joyfully greeted his two brothers-in-law, Abu 
Sabrah and Abu Hudhayfah. 



XLIII 


The Battle ofBadr 


T HE Prophet now drew up his army, and he passed in front of each 
man to give them good heart and to straighten the ranks, bearing an 
arrow in his hand. “Stand in line, O Sawad,” he said to one of the 
Helpers who was too far forward, and he gave him a slight prick in the 
belly with his arrow. “O Messenger of God, thou hast hurt me,” said 
Sawad, “and God hath sent thee with truth and justice, so give me my 
requital.” “Take it,” said the Prophet, laying bare his own belly and 
handing him the arrow whereupon Sawad stooped and imprinted a kiss 
where it was his due to place the point of the shaft. “What made thee do 
this?” said the Prophet. And he answered: “O Messenger of God, we are 
now faced with what thou seest; and I desired that at my last moment with 
thee - if so it be - my skin should touch thy skin;” and the Prophet prayed 
for him and blessed him. 

Quraysh had now begun to advance. Seen across the undulating dunes, 
the Meccan army appeared to be much smaller than it was. But the Prophet 
was fully aware of their true numbers and of the great disparity between 
the two hosts, and he now returned to the shelter with Abu Bakr and 
prayed for the help which God had promised him. 

A light slumber came upon him, and when he woke he said: “Be of good 
cheer, Abu Bakr; the help of God hath come to thee. Here is Gabriel and in 
his hand is the rein of a horse which he is leading, and he is armed for 
war.” 1 

In the history of the Arabs many a battle had been averted at the last 
minute, even when two forces were drawn up face to face. But the Prophet 
was now certain that the battle would take place, and that this formidable 
array was the one of the two parties that he had been promised. The 
vultures also knew that carnage was now imminent and they were already 
in wait to feed on the carcasses of the slain, some wheeling overhead and 
others perched on the rocky slopes in the rear of either army. It was, 
moreover, clear from the movements of Quraysh that they were preparing 
to attack. They were already near and had now halted within easy reach of 
the cistern which the Muslims had made. It seemed likely that their first 
move would be to take possession of it. 

Aswad of Makhzum strode ahead of the others, clearly intending to 
drink. Hamzah went out to meet him and struck him a blow which severed 
one of his legs below the knee, and a second blow which killed him. Then 


B. LXIV, io; I.I. 444. 



The Battle ofBadr 147 

‘Utbah, still smarting from the taunts of Abu Jahl, stepped from the ranks 
and gave the challenge for single combat; and for the further honour of the 
family his brother Shaybah and his son Walld stepped forward on either 
side of him. The challenge was immediately accepted by ‘Awf of the Najjar 
clan of Khazraj, who had been one of the first six of the Helpers to pledge 
themselves to the Prophet; and with ‘Awf stepped forward his brother 
Mu‘awwidh. It was their quarter in Medina that Qaswa’ had chosen as the 
ultimate halt of the Hijrah. The third to accept the challenge was ‘Abd 
Allah ibn Rawahah, who had defied his leader Ibn Ubayy in speaking 
words of welcome and comfort to the Prophet. 

“Who are ye?” said the challengers. When the men answered, ‘Utbah 
said: “Ye are noble and our peers, yet have we naught to do with you. Our 
challenge is against none but men of our own tribe.” Then the herald of 
Quraysh shouted: “O Muhammad, send forth against us our peers from 
our own tribe.” The Prophet had not intended anything else, but the 
eagerness of the Helpers had forestalled him. Now he turned to his own 
family, since it was above all for them to initiate the battle. The challengers 
were two men of mature age and one youth. “Arise, O ‘Ubaydah,” he said. 
“Arise, O Hamzah. Arise, O ‘All.” ‘Ubaydah was the oldest and most 
experienced man in the army, a grandson of Muttalib, and he faced ‘Utbah 
while Hamzah faced Shaybah and ‘All faced Walld. The combats were not 
long: Shaybah and Walld were soon lying dead on the ground, while 
Hamzah and ‘All were unhurt: but at the moment when ‘Ubaydah struck 
‘Utbah to the ground he received from him a sweep of the sword that 
severed one of his legs. It was a triple contest, three against three, so 
Hamzah and ‘All turned their swords on ‘Utbah, and Hamzah gave him 
the death blow. Then they carried their wounded cousin back to their 
camp. He had lost a mortal quantity of blood, and the marrow was oozing 
from the stump of his leg. He had only one thought. “Am I not a martyr, O 
Messenger of God?” he said as the Prophet approached him. “Indeed thou 
art,” he answered. 

The tense stillness between the two hosts was now broken by the sound 
of an arrow from Quraysh, and a freedman of ‘Umar fell to the ground, 
fatally wounded. A second arrow pierced the throat of Harithah, a youth 
of Khazraj, as he was drinking at the cistern. The Prophet now exhorted his 
men saying: “By Him in whose hand is the soul of Muhammad, no man 
will be slain this day, fighting against them in steadfast hope of his reward, 
advancing not retreating, but God shall straightway enter him into 
Paradise.” 1 His words were passed on by those who heard them to those 
who were out of earshot. ‘Umayr of the Salimah clan of Khazraj had a 
handful of dates which he was eating. “Wonder of wonders!” he ex¬ 
claimed. “Is there naught between me and my entering Paradise, but that 
these men should slay me?”, and he flung away the dates and put his hand 
to his sword, in eager readiness for the word of command. 

‘Awf was standing near to the Prophet, disappointed at having lost the 
honour of the challenge he had been the first to accept, and he now turned 
to him and said: “O Messenger of God, what is it that maketh the Lord 


I.I.445. 



148 Muhammad 

laugh with joy at His slave?” At once came the answer: “When he plungeth 
without mail into the midst of the foe”; and ‘Awf began to strip off the coat 
of mail he was wearing, while the Prophet took up a handful of pebbles 
and shouting at Quraysh “Defaced be those faces!”, he hurled the pebbles 
at them, conscious that he was hurling disaster. Then he gave the order to 
charge. The battle cry he had devised for them, Yd mansfir amit , x resound¬ 
ed from every throat as the men surged forward. ‘Awf without his mail and 
‘Umayr were among the first to meet the enemy and both fought until they 
were slain. Their deaths and those of ‘Ubaydah and the two killed by 
arrows brought the number of martyrs up to five. Only nine more of the 
faithful were to die that day, amongst them that other ‘Umayr, Sa‘d’s 
younger brother, whom the Prophet had wanted to send home. 

Thou threwest not when thou threwest, but it was God that threw . 1 
These words were part of the Revelation which came immediately after the 
battle. Nor were the pebbles the only manifestation of Divine strength 
which flowed from the hand of the Prophet on that day. At one point where 
the resistance of Quraysh was at its strongest a sword broke in the hands of 
a believer, whose first thought was to go and ask the Prophet for another 
weapon. It was ‘Ukkashah, a kinsman of the family of Jahsh. The Prophet 
gave him a wooden club saying: “Fight with this, ‘Ukkashah.” He took it 
and brandished it and it became in his hand a long, strong, gleaming 
sword. He fought with it for the rest of Badr and in all the Prophet’s other 
battles, and it was named al-‘Awn which means the Divine Help. 

When the believers were ordered to charge, they did not charge alone, as 
well the Prophet knew, for he had been promised: I will help you with a 
thousand of the angels, troop on troop? And the Angels also had received a 
Divine message: When thy Lord revealed unto the angels: Lo, I am with 
you, so make firm the believers. I shall cast terror into the hearts of the 
disbelievers. It is for you to strike off their heads, and to smite their every 
finger . 4 

The presence of the Angels was felt by all, as a strength by the faithful 
and as a terror by the infidels, but that presence was only visible or audible 
to a few, and in varying degrees. Two men of a neighbouring Arab tribe 
had gone to the top of a hill to see the issue and to take part - so they hoped 
- in the looting after the battle. A cloud swept by them, a cloud filled with 
the neighing of stallions, and one of the men dropped instantly dead. “His 
heart burst with fright,” said the one who lived to tell of it, judging from 
what his own heart had felt. 

One of the believers was pursuing a man of the enemy, and the man’s 
head flew from his body before he could reach him, struck off by an unseen 
hand. Others had brief glimpses of the Angels riding on horses whose 
hooves never touched the ground, led by Gabriel wearing a yellow turban, 
whereas the turbans of the other Angels were white, with one end left 
streaming behind them. Quraysh were soon utterly routed and put to 
flight, except in small groups where the Angels had not passed. In one of 
these Abu Jahl fought on with unabated ferocity until Mu‘adh, the brother 
of ‘Awf, smote him to the ground. ‘Ikrimah, the son of Abu Jahl, then 

1 Concise in Arabic but not in English: “O thou whom God hath made victorious, slay!” 

2 VIII, 17. 3 VIII, 9. 4 VIII, iz. 



The Battle ofBadr 149 

struck Mu‘adh and all but severed his arm at the shoulder. Mu‘adh went 
on fighting with his good arm, while the other hung limply by its skin at his 
side; but when it became too painful he stooped, and putting his foot on his 
dead hand jerked himself up, tore off the encumbrant limb, and continued 
in pursuit of the enemy. Abu Jahl was still full of life, but Mu‘awwidh, 
Awf’s second brother, recognised him as he lay there and struck him a 
blow which left him dying. Then Mu‘awwidh passed on and like ‘Awf he 
fought until he was slain. 

Most of Quraysh escaped, but some fifty were mortally wounded or 
killed outright in the battle or overtaken and cut down as they fled. About 
the same number were taken captive. The Prophet had said to his 
Companions: “I know that men of the sons of Hashim and others have 
been brought out despite themselves, without any will to fight us.” And he 
mentioned by name some of those whose lives should be spared if they 
were caught. But most of his army were in any case bent on holding their 
captives to ransom rather than putting them to the sword. 

Since Quraysh so greatly outnumbered the believers, the possibility of 
their rallying and returning to the fight had still to be considered, and the 
Prophet was persuaded to withdraw to his shelter with Abu Bakr while 
some of the Helpers kept watch. Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh was standing on guard at 
the entrance with drawn sword, and when his fellow warriors started to 
bring their captives into the camp the Prophet was struck by the expression 
of strong disapproval on his face. “O Sa‘d,” he said, “it would seem that 
what they are doing is hateful in thine eyes.” Sa‘d vigorously assented; then 
he added: “This is the first defeat God hath inflicted on the idolaters; and I 
had rather see their men slaughtered than left alive.” ‘Umar was of the 
same opinion, but Abu Bakr was in favour of letting the captives live, in 
the hope that sooner or later they might become believers, and the Prophet 
inclined to his view. But later in the day, when ‘Umar returned to the 
shelter, he found the Prophet and Abu Bakr in tears on account of a 
Revelation which had come: It is not for a prophet to hold captives until he 
hath made great slaughter in the land . 1 Ye would have for yourselves the 
gains of this world and God would have for you the Hereafter, and God is 
Mighty, Wise. But the Revelation then made it clear that the decision to 
spare the captives had been accepted by God and should not now be 
revoked; and the Prophet was given a message for the captives themselves: 
O Prophet, say unto those captives who are in your hands: If God 
knoweth any good in your hearts. He will give you better than that which 
hath been taken from you, and He will forgive you. Verily God is 
Forgiving, Merciful . 1 

There was, however, one man, Abu Jahl, who clearly could not be 
allowed to live. The general opinion was that he had been killed and the 
Prophet gave orders that his body should be searched for. ‘Abd Allah ibn 
Mas‘ud went out again to the battlefield and searched until he found the 
man who had done more than any other to stir up hatred of Islam amongst 
the people of Mecca. Abu Jahl still had enough life in him to recognise the 
enemy who now stood over him. ‘Abd Allah had been the first man to 

1 It was for wrongfully sparing a captive that Saul was deprived of his kingship (1 Samuel 
15)- 2 VIII, 70. 



150 Muhammad 

recite the Koran aloud in front of the Ka‘bah, and Abu Jahl had struck him 
a severe blow and wounded him in the face, for he was merely a 
confederate of Zuhrah and a poor one at that, his mother having been a 
slave. ‘Abd Allah now placed his foot on the neck of Abu Jahl, who said: 
“Thou hast climbed high indeed, little shepherd.” Then he asked him 
which way the fortunes of war had swung that day, his implication being 
that next time they would swing in the opposite direction. “God and His 
messenger have won,” he answered. Then he cut off his head and took it to 
the Prophet. 

Abu Jahl was not the only chief Of Quraysh to be killed after the fighting 
had finished. ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf was carrying coats of mail which 
he had taken as booty, and he passed by the corpulent Umayyah, who had 
lost his mount and was unable to escape. With him was his son ‘All, whose 
hand he was holding. Umayyah called out to his one-time friend: “Take me 
prisoner, for I am worth more than coats of mail.” ‘Abd ar-Rahman 
agreed, and throwing down the mail he took him and his son each by a 
hand. But as he was leading them towards the camp Bilal saw them and 
recognised his former master and torturer. “Umayyah,” he exclaimed, 
“the head of disbelief! May I not live if he survive!” ‘Abd ar-Rahman 
indignantly protested that they were his prisoners, but Bilal repeated his 
cry: “May I not live if he survive!” “Wilt thou not hear me, thou son of a 
black mother?” said the outraged captor, whereupon Bilal shouted with all 
the power of the voice that had won him the function of muezzin: “O 
Helpers of God, the head of disbelief, Umayyah! May I not live if he 
survive!” Men came running from all sides and narrowly encircled ‘Abd 
ar-Rahman and his two captives. Then a sword was drawn and ‘All was 
struck to the ground but not killed. ‘Abd ar-Rahman let go the father’s 
hand, “Make thine own escape,” he said, “yet no escape there is, for by 
God I can avail thee nothing!” Pushing him aside the men closed in upon 
the prisoners with their swords and quickly made an end of them both. 
‘Abd ar-Rahman used to say in after years: “God have mercy on Bilal! My 
coats of mail were lost to me, and he robbed me of my two prisoners.” 1 

The Prophet gave orders that the bodies of all the infidels slain in the 
battle should be thrown into a pit; and when the body of ‘Utbah was being 
dragged towards it the face of his son Abu Hudhayfah turned pale, and 
was filled with sorrow. The Prophet felt for him, and gave him a look of 
compassion, whereupon Abu Hudhayfah said: “O Messenger of God, it is 
not that I question thy command as to my father and the place where they 
have thrown him. But I used to know him as a man of wise counsel, 
forbearance and virtue, and I had hoped that these qualities would lead 
him unto Islam; and when I saw what had befallen him, and when I 
remembered what state of disbelief he died in after my hopes for him, it 
saddened me.” Then the Prophet blessed Abu Hudhayfah and spoke to 
him words of kindness. 

The peace and quiet of the camp was soon broken by voices raised in 
anger, for those who had stayed behind to guard the Prophet demanded a 
share of the booty, and those who had pursued the enemy and captured 


1 I.I.448-9. 



The Battle of Badr 151 

men and armour and weapons were unwilling to give up what their own 
hands had taken. But before the Prophet had time to restore harmony by 
ordering an equitable distribution of all that had been captured, the 
desired effect was achieved more simply and more immediately by a 
Revelation: They will question thee concerning the spoils of war. Say: The 
spoils of war are for God and the messenger . 1 So the Prophet ordered that 
everything that had been taken, including the captives, should be brought 
together and no longer be considered as the private property of any 
individual. The order was at once obeyed without question. 

The most eminent of the captives was the chief of ‘Amir, Suhayl, cousin 
of Sawdah and brother of her first husband. Others more closely connected 
with the Prophet were his uncle ‘Abbas, his son-in-law, Zaynab’s husband 
Abu l-‘As, and his cousins ‘Aqll and NawfaJ. He gave a general order that 
all the captives should be well treated, though clearly they had to be bound. 
But the thoughts of his uncle suffering such duress prevented the Prophet 
from sleeping that night, and he gave orders that his bonds should be 
loosed. Other captives received less indulgent treatment from their nearest 
of kin. Mus‘ab passed by his brother Abu ‘Aziz as he was being bound by 
the Helper who had captured him, and he said: “Bind him fast for his 
mother is rich, and it may be that she will ransom him from thee.” 
“Brother,” said Abu ‘Aziz, “is this how thou dost commend me to others?’’ 
“He is now my brother in thy stead,” said Mus‘ab. None the less, Abu 
‘Aziz used to tell in after years of the good treatment he received from the 
Helpers, who took him to Medina whence his mother ransomed him for 
4,000 dirhems. 

As soon as it became clear that the eight hundred or more Meccan troops 
still at large had been routed beyond possibility of rallying, the Prophet 
sent ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah to take the good tidings of victory to the 
people of Upper Medina, that is, the more southerly part of the city, and he 
sent Zayd to the people of Lower Medina. He himself remained with the 
army at Badr; and that night he went and stood by the pit into which the 
bodies of the enemies of Islam had been thrown. “O men of the pit,” he 
said, “kinsmen of your Prophet, ill was the kinship ye showed him. Liar ye 
called me, when others took me in; against me ye fought, when others 
helped me to victory. Have ye found it to be true, what your Lord promised 
you? I have found it to be true, what my Lord promised me.” Some of his 
Companions overheard him and wondered at his speaking to dead bodies. 
“Your hearing of what I say is not better than theirs,” he said, “but they 
cannot answer me.” 2 

Early next morning he set off for Medina with his army and the spoils. 
Two of the most valuable captives, that is those whose families could be 
relied upon to pay the full ransom of 4,000 dirhems, were Nadr of ‘Abd 
ad-Dar and ‘Uqbah 3 of ‘Abdu Shams. But these were two of the worst 
enemies of Islam, and if they were allowed to return they would im¬ 
mediately resume their evil activities, unless the Muslims’ victory at Badr 
against such odds had made them reflect. The Prophet’s eye was now 
constantly upon them; but there was no sign of any change of heart in 

1 VIII, 1. 2 1.1.454. 4 Seep. 98. 



152 Muhammad 

either man, and during the march it became clear to him that it was not in 
accordance with the Will of God that they should be left alive. At one of the 
first halts he gave orders that Nadr should be put to death, and it was ‘All 
who beheaded him. At a subsequent halt ‘Uqbah suffered the same fate at 
the hands of a man of Aws. The Prophet divided the remainder of the 
captives and the rest of the spoils at a halt within three days’ march of 
Medina, giving insofar as was possible an equal share to every man who 
had taken part in the expedition. 

By that time Zayd and ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah had reached Medina, 
and there was great rejoicing amongst all except the Jews and the 
hypocrites. But Zayd was given sad news in exchange for his good news: 
Ruqayyah was dead; ‘Uthman and Usamah had just returned from 
burying her. The lamentations in that part of the city were still further 
increased when Zayd told ‘Afra’ of the death of her two sons ‘Awf and 
Mu‘awwidh. Sawdah went between her own house and theirs to join the 
mourning in both. For ‘Afra’ there was joy mingled with sorrow on 
account of the glorious manner of her sons’ deaths. But Zayd had also to 
tell Rubayyi‘ of the death of her youthful son Harithah ibn Suraqah, whose 
neck had been pierced by an arrow as he was drinking at the cistern; and as 
soon as the Prophet himself returned a few days later she came to him and 
asked him about her son; for she was troubled by the thought that the 
youth had been slain before the battle had started and before he had had 
time to strike a blow for Islam. “O Messenger of God,” she said, “wilt thou 
not tell me of Harithah, so that if he be in Paradise I may bear my loss with 
patience, and if not I may do penance for him with weeping.” The Prophet 
had already answered such questions in general, for he had promised that a 
believer is rewarded for what he purposes, even if he should not achieve it: 
“Deeds are counted according to the intention.” 1 But he now answered her 
in particular, saying: “Mother of Harithah, in Paradise are many Gardens, 
and verily thy son hath attained unto the all-highest, Firdaws.” 2 

1 B.I, i. 2 B. LVI, 14. 


XLIV 

The Return of the 
Vanquished 

T HE army of Quraysh made its way back to Mecca in small groups, 
preceded or followed by single individuals. One of the first to arrive 
with the news was the Hashimite Abu Sufyan whose brother 
Nawfal had been captured. Abu Sufyan’s hostility towards the new 
religion had spurred him to write verses against it and against his cousin 
and foster-brother, the Prophet. But the experience of Badr had greatly 
shaken him. His first thought was to visit the Ka‘bah, and it happened that 
his uncle Abu Lahab was sitting in the large tent that was known as the tent 
of Zamzam. Seeing his nephew, Abu Lahab called out to him to come and 
sit with him and tell him what had happened. “There is no more to it than 
this,” said Abu Sufyan. “We met the enemy and turned our backs, and they 
drove us in flight or took captives even as they pleased. Nor can I blame any 
of our folk, for we had to face not only them but also men in white on 
piebald horses between heaven and earth who spared nothing and nothing 
could stand up against them.” 

Now Umm al-Fadl was sitting in a corner of the tent, and with her was 
Abu Rafi‘, one of ‘Abbas’s slaves, who was making arrows. Like her he was 
a Muslim, and they had both kept their Islam secret from all save a few. But 
Abu Rafi‘ could not contain himself for joy at the news of the Prophet’s 
victory; and when he heard speak of the “men in white between heaven 
and earth” he exclaimed in wonder and in triumph: “Those were the 
Angels.” Immediately Abu Lahab was overcome by a paroxysm of rage 
and he struck Abu Rafi‘ a wounding blow in the face. The slave tried to 
retaliate, but he was slight and weak, and the thickset ponderous Abu 
Lahab bore him to the ground, knelt on him and struck him again and 
again. Then Umm al-Fadl took up a wooden post which was sometimes 
used to reinforce the tent poles, and she brought it down with all her 
strength on the head of her brother-in-law, splitting the skin and flesh 
away from his skull in a long gash that was never to heal. “Wilt thou treat 
him as of no account,” she cried, “now that his master is away and cannot 
protect him?” The wound putrefied, and within a week his whole body 
was covered with festering pustules from which he died. 

When further news of the battle was brought, and when the bereaved 
began to bewail their dead, a decision was quickly made in the Assembly 



154 Muhammad 

that they should be told to restrain themselves. “Muhammad and his 
companions,” it was said to them, “will have news of this and rejoice.” As 
to the kinsmen of the captives, they were urged to delay sending any offers 
of ransom to Yathrib. Through the deaths of so many eminent men, the 
Umayyad Abu Sufyan had become, in the eyes of many, the leading man of 
Quraysh; and as if to set an example he said with regard to his two sons, 
Hanzalah and ‘Amr, the one killed and the other made captive: “Must I 
suffer the twofold loss of my blood and my wealth? They have slain 
Hanzalah, and must I now ransom ‘Amr? Leave him with them. Let them 
keep him as long as they please!” 

Abu Sufyan’s fiery wife Hind was not the mother of either Hanzalah or 
‘Amr; but at the outset of the battle she had lost her father, ‘Utbah, her 
uncle Shaybah, and her brother Walld; and, though she held back her 
lamentations, she vowed that when Quraysh took their revenge on the 
Muslim army - as take it they must - she would eat raw the liver of 
Hamzah who had slain her uncle and given her father the death-blow. 

As to the rich caravan load which Abu Sufyan had brought safely to 
Mecca, it was unanimously agreed in the Assembly that all the profits 
should be devoted to raising an army so large and so powerfully equipped 
that it could not fail to crush any resistance that Yathrib might be able to 
put up against it; and this time women would march out with the men, to 
urge them on and spur them to excel themselves in deeds of valour. It was 
also agreed, to the same purpose, to send messengers to all their many allies 
throughout Arabia, summoning them to join in their attack, and giving 
them what they thought to be powerful reasons why the followers of the 
new religion should be considered as a common enemy. 

While respecting the precept of the Assembly about lamentation, most 
of Quraysh disregarded what had been said about ransoming, and men 
from almost every dan were soon on their way to Medina in order to make 
terms with the captors and set free one or more of their kinsmen or allies. 
Abu Sufyan kept his word; but at the next Pilgrimage he detained one of 
the pilgrims from the oasis, an old man of Aws, and said he would not 
release him until his son ‘Amr had been returned to him; and the pilgrim’s 
family persuaded the Prophet to agree to this exchange. 



XLV 

The Captives 

T HE captives arrived in Medina with their guards a day after the 
arrival of the Prophet. Sawdah, who had gone once more to visit 
‘Afra’, was astonished on her return to see her cousin and brother- 
in-law Suhayl, the chief of her clan, sitting in a corner of the room with his 
hands tied to his neck. The sight aroused long-forgotten sentiments and 
made her forget for the moment all that had replaced them. “O Abu 
Yazld,” she expostulated, “all too readily didst thou surrender. Thou 
shouldst have died a noble death.” “Sawdah!” exclaimed the Prophet, 
whose presence she had not noticed. The reproof in his voice immediately 
brought her back, not without a sense of shame, from her pre-Islamic past 
to her Islamic present. There were still hopes that Suhayl would enter 
Islam, and surely the impact of the now flourishing and already powerful 
theocracy could not fail to impress him and the other captives. But the 
Prophet relied on his followers to put Islamic and not pagan ideas into their 
heads. Again he turned to the now repentant Sawdah: “Wouldst thou 
foment trouble against God and His Messenger ? ” 

The eminence of Suhayl, like that of Abu Sufyan, had been greatly 
enhanced by the deaths of so many leaders. His influence could have been 
expected to bring many waverers to Islam from his own clan and also from 
others; but his stay in Medina was cut short, for the Bani ‘Amir quickly 
sent one of their clan to ransom him, and the man consented to remain as 
hostage while his chief went back to Mecca to arrange the payment of the 
sum agreed upon. 

Each of the captives had been shared between three or more of the 
combatants, and the group of Helpers who owned ‘Abbas now brought 
him to the Prophet and said: “O Messenger of God, allow us to forgo the 
ransom due to us for our sister’s son.” By “sister” they meant the captive’s 
grandmother, Salma. But the Prophet said: “Ye shall not remit a single 
dirhem.” Then he turned to his uncle, saying: “Ransom thyself ‘Abbas and 
thy two nephews, ‘AqTl and Nawfal, and thine ally ‘Utbah, for thou art a 
rich man.” ‘Abbas protested: “I was already a Muslim, but the people 
made me march out with them.” The Prophet answered: “As to thine 
Islam, God knoweth best. If what thou sayest is true, He will reward thee. 
But outwardly thou hast been against us, so pay us thy ransom.” ‘Abbas 
replied that he had no money, but the Prophet said: “Where then is the 
money thou didst leave with Umm al-Fadl? Ye two were alone when thou 
didst say to her: ‘If I should be slain, so much is for Fadl, for ‘Abd Allah, for 
Qitham and for ‘Ubayd Allah.’ ” It was then only that faith truly entered 



156 Muhammad 

the heart of ‘Abbas. “By Him who sent thee with the truth,” he said, “none 
knew of this but she and I. Now I know that thou art the Messenger of 
God.” 1 And he agreed to ransom his two nephews and his confederate as 
well as himself. 

One of the prisoners who was quartered with the Prophet was his 
son-in-law Abu l-‘ As, whose brother * Amr came from Mecca with a sum of 
money sent by Zaynab to ransom him; and with the money she sent a 
necklace of onyx which her mother had given her on her wedding day. 
When the Prophet saw the necklace he turned pale, recognising it at once as 
Khadljah’s. Deeply moved, he said to those who had a share in the 
prisoner: “If ye should see fit to release her captive husband and return to 
her the ransom, it is for you to do so.” They at once agreed, and both the 
money and the necklace were returned together with Abu l-‘As himself. It 
had been hoped that he would enter Islam while he was in Medina, but he 
did not, and when he left for Mecca the Prophet told him that on his return 
he should send Zaynab to Medina, and this he sadly promised to do. The 
Revelation had made it clear that a Muslim woman could not be the wife of 
a pagan man. 

‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh had a share in Walld, the youngest son of the now 
dead Walid, the former chief of Makhzum. The youth’s two brothers 
Khalid and Hisham came to ransom him. ‘Abd Allah would take no less 
than four thousand dirhems, and Khalid, the captive’s half-brother, was 
unwilling to give so much, but the full brother Hisham reproached him 
saying: “True, he is not thy mother’s son,” whereupon Khalid consented. 
The Prophet, however, was against the transaction and told ‘Abd Allah 
that he should ask them for nothing less than their father’s famous arms 
and armour. Khalid once more refused, but again Hisham won him over; 
and when they had brought the heirloom to Medina they set off with their 
brother again for Mecca. But at one of the first halts he slipped away from 
them and returned to Medina, where he went to the Prophet and made his 
formal entry into Islam, pledging allegiance to him. His brothers followed 
hard after him, and, when they saw what had happened, the outraged 
Khalid said to him: “Why was this not done before thou wert ransomed, 
and before our father’s treasured legacy had left our hands? Why didst 
thou not become a follower of Muhammad then, if that was thy purpose?” 
Walld answered that he was not the man to let Quraysh say of him: “He 
did but follow Muhammad to escape from having to pay ransom.” Then 
he went back with his brothers to Mecca to fetch some of his possessions, 
not suspecting that they would do anything against him. But once there 
they imprisoned him with ‘Ayyash and Salamah, the two Muslim half 
brothers of Abu Jahl, whom ‘Ikrimah the son of Abu Jahl still kept under 
guard after his father’s death. The Prophet used often to pray for the escape 
of all three of them and of Hisham of Sahm and others who were forcibly 
detained in Mecca. 

Jubayr the son of Mut‘im came to ransom his cousin and two of their 
confederates, and the Prophet received him graciously. He told him that if 
Mut‘im had been alive and had come to him on behalf of the prisoners he 


1 Tab. 1344. 



The Captives 157 

would have surrendered them to him free of ransom. Jubayr was impressed 
by everything he saw in Medina; and one evening, at sunset, he stayed 
outside the Mosque and listened to the prayer. The Prophet recited the 
Surah named at-fiir , The Mount, which warns of the Judgement and of 
Hell, and then speaks of the wonders of Paradise. It ends with the words: 
Wait patiently for the fulfilment of thy Lord's decree, for verily thou art in 
Our sight; and glorify thy Lord with praise when thou uprisest, and glorify 
Him in the night, and at the dimming of the stars . 1 

“It was then,” said Jubayr, “that faith took root in my heart.” 2 But he 
would not yet listen to its promptings for he was too engrossed with 
thoughts of his beloved uncle’s recent death at Badr. Tu‘aymah, Mut/im’s 
brother, was one of those whom Hamzah had killed, and Jubayr felt 
bound in honour to avenge his death; and fearing lest he should weaken in 
his purpose, he left for Mecca as soon as he had reached an agreement 
about the ransoms. 

Most of the ransomers were at least courteous to the Prophet. An 
exception was Ubayy of Jumah, the brother of Umayyah and bosom friend 
of ‘Uqbah, both of whom had been killed after the battle. As he was leaving 
with his ransomed son he said: “O Muhammad, I have a horse named 
‘ Awd that I feed every day on many measures of corn. I shall slay thee when 
I am riding him.” “Nay,” said the Prophet, “it is I who shall slay thee, if 
Godwill.” 3 

Meantime in Mecca Ubayy’s two nephews, Safwan and ‘Umayr, were 
speaking with savage bitterness about the irretrievable loss caused to 
Quraysh by the death of those leaders who had been thrown into the pit at 
Badr. Safwan was the son of Umayyah and likely to become chief of Jumah 
now that his father was dead. His cousin ‘Umayr was the man who had 
ridden round the Muslim army at Badr and estimated its strength. “By 
God, there is no good in life, now that they are gone,” said Safwan. ‘Umayr 
agreed, and he was nearer to sincerity than the other. His son was one of 
the captives, but he was too heavily in debt to ransom him, and he felt so 
oppressed with his life that he was prepared to sacrifice it to the common 
cause. “But for a debt I cannot pay,” he said, “and a family I fear to leave 
destitute, I would ride out to Muhammad and kill him.” “On me be thy 
debt,” said Safwan, “and thy family be as mine! I will care for them as long 
as they live. They shall not want for aught that is mine to give them.” 
‘Umayr immediately accepted his offer, and they swore to keep it a secret 
between the two of them until their end had been achieved. Then he 
sharpened his sword, smeared it with poison, and set off for Yathrib on the 
pretext of ransoming his son. 

When he reached Lower Medina, the Prophet was sitting in the Mosque. 
On seeing ‘Umayr girt with his sword, ‘Umar stopped him from entering, 
but the Prophet called to him to let the Jumahite approach. So ‘Umar said 
to some Helpers who were with him: “Go ye in unto the Messenger of God 
and sit with him and be on your guard for him against this villain, for he is 
in no wise to be trusted.” ‘Umayr wished them good day - a salutation of 
paganism - and the Prophet said: “God hath given us a better greeting than 


LII, 48—9. 


2 B. LII, z 5 . 


W. z 5 i. 



158 Muhammad 

thine, O ‘Umayr. It is Peace, the greeting of the people of Paradise.” Then 
he asked him why he had come, and ‘Umayr mentioned his son as the 
reason. “Why then that sword?” said the Prophet. “God damn swords!” 
said ‘Umayr. “Have they done us any good service?” “Tell me the truth,” 
said the Prophet. “To what end hast thou come?” And when ‘Umayr 
reiterated the pretext of his son, the Prophet repeated to him word for 
word the conversation he had had in the Hijr with Safwan. “So Safwan 
took upon himself thy debt and thy family,” he concluded, “that thou 
shouldst slay me; but God hath come between thee and that.” “Who told 
thee this,” cried ‘Umayr, “for by God there was no third man with us?” 
“Gabriel told me,” said the Prophet. “We called thee liar,” said ‘Umayr, 
“when thou didst bring us tidings from Heaven. But praise be to God who 
hath guided me unto Islam. I testify that there is no god but God, and that 
Muhammad is the messenger of God.” The Prophet turned to some of 
those who were present and said. “Instruct your brother in his religion, 
and recite unto him the Koran; and release for him his captive son.” 1 

‘Umayr was eager to return to Mecca that he might try to bring others to 
Islam, Safwan amongst them. The Prophet gave him permission to go and 
he made many converts; but Safwan considered him to be a traitor, and 
resolutely refused to speak to him or have anything to do with him. After 
some months ‘Umayr returned to Medina as an Emigrant. 

When Abu l-‘As returned to Mecca, he told Zaynab that he had promised 
her father that he would send her to Medina. They agreed that their little 
daughter Umamah should go with her. Their son ‘All had died in infancy, 
and Zaynab was now expecting a third child. When all the preparations 
had been made for the journey, Abu l-‘As sent with them his brother 
Kinanah as escort. They had kept their plans secret, but they none the less 
set off in daylight, and there was much talk about it in Mecca, until finally 
some of Quraysh decided to follow them and to bring Zaynab back into 
the bosom of the clan of ‘Abdu Shams to which she belonged by marriage. 
When they were close upon them, a man of Fihr, Ha b bar by name, 
galloped on ahead and circled closely round them, brandishing his spear at 
Zaynab as she sat in her howdah with Umamah, and then rejoining the 
others who were now close upon them. Kinanah dismounted, took his 
bow, knelt facing them, and emptied his quiver onto the sand in front of 
him. “Let one of you come near me,” he said, “and by God, I will put an 
arrow into him.” The men drew back as he bent his bow. Then, after a brief 
consultation, his chief, Abu Sufyan, and one or two others dismounted and 
walked forward, asking him to unbend his bow and discuss the matter 
with them. Kinanah agreed, and Abu Sufyan said to him: “It was a grave 
mistake to bring the woman out publicly over the heads of the people, 
when thou knowest the disaster that hath befallen us, and all that 
Muhammad hath done against us. It will be taken as a sign that we have 
been humbled, and men will say that it is nothing but impotence on our 
part. By my life, it is not that we want to keep her from her father, nor 
would that serve us for revenge. But take the woman back to Mecca, and 


' I.S. IV, 147; I. 1 .471-3. 



The Captives 159 

when tongues have stopped wagging about our meekness, and when the 
news hath spread that we went out after her and brought her back, then 
steal her out secretly to join her father.” Kinanah accepted this proposal, 
and they all returned to Mecca together. Shortly afterwards Zaynab had a 
miscarriage which was attributed to the fright caused her by Habbar. 
When she had recovered, and when time enough had elapsed, Kinanah 
took her out with Umamah under cover of the night, and escorted them as 
far as the valley of Yajaj, some eight miles from Mecca. There they were 
met by Zayd, as had previously been arranged, and he brought them safely 
to Medina. 



XL VI 


Bani Qaynuqa‘ 


I T had long been clear that the Jews did not consider the Prophet’s 
covenant as binding upon them, and that most of them preferred the 
pagan idolaters to the Muslim worshippers of the One God. While 
affirming the piety and trustworthiness of individuals amongst the Jews, 
the Revelations were now full of warnings against the majority. The 
Prophet and his followers were urged to beware of them: They will do all 
they can to ruin you, and they love to cause you trouble . Their hatred is 
clear from what their mouths utter, and what their breasts conceal is 
greater .' 

There could be no doubt that the hopes of the Jews were turning more 
and more to the Prophet’s own tribe as the chief means of obliterating the 
new religion and thus of restoring the oasis of Yathrib to what it had been 
in the past. His movements were regularly reported to Mecca; and if 
Quraysh marched out against him as far as the Jewish fortresses to the 
South of Medina, that is to within about half a day’s journey from his 
Mosque, it seemed certain that the Meccan army would be reinforced at 
the crucial moment by powerful Jewish contingents. 

If good befall you, it is evil in their eyes, and if evil befall you they rejoice 
thereat . 2 This was plainly demonstrated by the Jews’ reaction to the victory 
at Badr. When the news came, the tribes of Qaynuqa‘, Nadir and 
Qurayzah were unable to conceal their dismay. Particularly striking was 
the case of Ka‘b the son of Ashraf. His father was an Arab of the tribe of 
Tayy, but Ka‘b counted himself as being, through his mother, of the Bani 
Nadir, who accepted him as one of themselves because his mother was a 
Jewess. He had become in fact a prominent member of the tribe, partly 
owing to his wealth and his strong personality, and also because he was a 
poet of some fame. When he heard the tidings that Zayd and l Abd Allah 
brought, with the names of all the outstanding men of Quraysh who had 
been killed, he exclaimed: “By God, if Muhammad have slain these men, 
then is the inside of the earth better than its outside”; and when he had 
made certain that the tidings were true he immediately left the oasis before 
the return of the Prophet, and went to Mecca where he composed a lament 
for Abu Jahl, ‘Utbah, Shaybah and others of the dead. At the same time he 
urged Quraysh to redeem their honour and take their revenge by mustering 
an invincible quantity of troops and leading them against Yathrib. 

News of Ka‘b’s activities came to Medina; but Ka‘b was out of reach for 


III, 118. 


2 III, 120. 



BaniQaynuqa' 161 

the moment, and more immediate action was called for against a Jewish 
tribe other than his. The Prophet was especially well informed of the 
treachery and hatred of the Bani Qaynuqa', because c Abd Allah ibn Sallam 
had been one of their leading men, and was well versed in their ways. 
Moreover it was they who were the allies of the Khazrajite Ibn Ubayy, 
leader of the hypocrites; and their presence was more felt than that of the 
other Jewish tribes because their settlements were close to the city itself, 
whereas the Bani Nadir and Qurayzah, the allies of Aws, lived at some 
distance outside it. 

The Prophet had recently received the command: If thou fearest 
treachery from any folk, then throw hack unto them their covenant. Verily 
God loveth not the treacherous .’ But the Revelation also said: If they 
incline unto peace, incline thou also unto it, and trust in God. 2 He was 
therefore unwilling to take irrevocable action if anything could be gained 
by gentler means, and on one of the first days after his return from Badr he 
went to meet the Bani Qaynuqa* in their market place in the south of 
Medina. Reflecting on the miracle of Badr might lead them to a change of 
heart, so he warned them not to call down upon themselves the anger of 
God which had just now fallen upon Quraysh. “O Muhammad,” they 
answered “be not deluded by that encounter, for it was against men who 
had no knowledge of war, and so thou didst get the better of them. But by 
God, if we make war on thee, thou shalt know that we are the men to be 
feared.” The Prophet turned and left them, and they imagined for the 
moment that they had triumphed. 

A few days later, in the same market-place, an incident occurred which 
brought things to a climax: a Muslim woman who had come to sell or 
exchange some goods was grossly insulted by one of the Jewish gold¬ 
smiths. A Helper who happened to be present came to her rescue and the 
offender was killed in the fight which ensued, whereupon the Jews fell 
upon the Muslim and killed him. His family then demanded vengeance and 
proceeded to rouse up the Helpers against the Qaynuqa\ But blood had 
been shed on both sides, and the affair could easily have been settled and 
reduced to its true proportions if the Jews had demanded the arbitration of 
the Prophet according to the covenant. But this they scorned to do; and, 
deciding that the time had come to teach the intruders a lesson, they sent 
for reinforcements to their two former allies of Khazraj, Ibn Ubayy and 
‘Ubadah ibn Samit, while they themselves withdrew — for the moment, as 
they thought - into their own powerfully fortified and well provisioned 
strongholds. They could muster an army of seven hundred men, which was 
more than double the Muslim army at Badr; and they relied on at least as 
many men again from Ibn Ubayy and ‘Ubadah. When these appeared they 
no doubt intended to issue from their fortresses and show the Prophet that 
their recent threats had not been empty words. 

But in fact those threats had been their own self-condemnation; and 
within a few hours they were astonished and dismayed to find themselves 
blockaded on all sides by an army which outnumbered their own and 
which demanded their unconditional surrender. 


VIII, 58. 


2 VIII, 61. 



i6z Muhammad 


Ibn Ubayy went to consult with ‘Ubadah, but ‘Ubadah was obdurate 
that no former treaty could stand in opposition to the covenant, and he 
renounced all responsibility for QaynuqaL As for Ibn Ubayy, it was not in 
his nature to cut in one moment the links which he had so deliberately 
forged over the years between himself and such powerful allies. But it was 
impossible for him to be blind, as the Jews were blind, to the present 
devotion of most of his fellow townsmen to the Prophet. He had too often 
tasted the bitterness of being clearly shown by his once devoted followers 
that their allegiance to him was far outweighed by another allegiance. Two 
years previously, with the help of the besieged from within, he could have 
broken the blockade of a larger army. But now he knew that once the 
Prophet had taken action he himself could do nothing against him. So the 
Bani Qaynuqa‘ waited in vain behind their battlements, and their hopes 
dwindled to despair as day after day passed without any sign of help. For 
two weeks they held out; and then they surrendered unconditionally. 

Ibn Ubayy now came to the camp and approaching the Prophet he said: 
“O Muhammad, treat my confederates well.” The Prophet put him off, 
and then when the demand was repeated he turned away from him, 
whereupon Ibn Ubayy clutched him by his coat of mail, thrusting his hand 
into the neck of it. The Prophet’s face grew dark with anger. “Let go thy 
hold,” he said. “By God. I will not,” said Ibn Ubayy, “until thou dost 
promise to treat them well. Four hundred men without mail and three 
hundred mailed - they protected me from the red and from the black. 1 Wilt 
thou cut them down in one morning?” “I grant thee their lives,” said the 
Prophet. But the Revelation had commanded, with regard to those who 
broke treaties with him: If thou overcomest them in war, then make of 
them an example, to strike fear into those that are behind them, that they 
may take heed; 2 and, having decided that the Bani Qaynuqa 4 should forfeit 
all their possessions and be exiled, he told ‘Ubadah to escort them out of 
the oasis. They took refuge with a kindred Jewish settlement to the 
north-west in Wadi 1 -Qura, and with their help they eventually settled on 
the borders of Syria. 

They were metalworkers by trade, and the Emigrants and Helpers were 
greatly enriched by the weapons and armour that were divided amongst 
them after the Prophet had taken his legal fifth for himself and his 
theocratic state. 


1 See p. 1 1 z, note. 


2 VIII, 57- 



XLVII 

Deaths and 
Marriages 

O NE of the immediate acts of the Prophet on his return from Badr 
had been to visit the grave of his daughter Ruqayyah, and Fatimah 
went with him. This was the first bereavement they had suffered 
within their closest family circle since the death of Khadljah, and Fatimah 
was greatly distressed by the loss of her sister. The tears poured from her 
eyes as she sat beside her father at the edge of the grave, and he comforted 
her and sought to dry her tears with the corner of his cloak. He had 
previously spoken against lamentations for the dead, but this had led to a 
misunderstanding, and when they returned from the cemetery the voice of 
‘Umar was heard raised in anger against the women who were weeping for 
the martyrs of Badr and for Ruqayyah. “‘Umar, let them weep,” he said. 
And then he added: “What cometh from the heart and from the eye, that is 
from God and His Mercy, but what cometh from the hand and from the 
tongue, that is from Satan.” 1 By the hand he meant the beating of the breast 
and the lacerating of the cheeks, and by the tongue he meant the vociferous 
clamour in which all the women joined as a social gesture. 

Fatimah was the youngest of his daughters, and she was at this time 
about twenty years old. To his family he had already spoken of ‘All as the 
most fitting husband for her, but there had been no formal contract. Abu 
Bakr and ‘Umar had both asked for her hand, but the Prophet had put 
them off, not by saying that she was already promised to another but by 
telling them that he must wait for the time appointed by Heaven. It was 
only in the weeks which followed his return from Badr that he became 
certain that the time had come and he then spoke words of encouragement 
to ‘All in the wish that he should formally ask for her hand. ‘All was at first 
hesitant on account of his extreme poverty. He had inherited nothing from 
his father, for the law of the new religion forbade a believer to inherit from 
a disbeliever. But he had acquired a humble dwelling not far from the 
Mosque and, since there was no doubt about the Prophet’s wishes, he 
allowed himself to be persuaded. After the formal contract had been made, 
the Prophet insisted on a wedding feast. A ram was sacrificed and some of 
the Helpers brought offerings of grain. Abu Salamah, cousin to both 


1 I.S.VIII,2 4 . 



164 Muhammad 

bridegroom and bride, was anxious to help, the more so since he owed so 
much to ‘All’s father, who had given him protection against Abu Jahl and 
other hostile members of his clan. So Umm Salamah went together with 
‘A’ishah to make ready the house for the bridal couple and to prepare the 
food. Soft sand was brought from the river bed and they scattered it over 
the earthern floor of the house. The bridal bed was a sheepskin and there 
was a faded coverlet of striped cloth from the Yemen. For a pillow they 
stuffed a leather cushion with palm fibre. Then they laid out dates and figs 
for the guests to eat in addition to the main meal, and they filled the 
waterskin with water that they had perfumed. It was generally agreed that 
this wedding feast was one of the finest held in Medina at this time. 

When the Prophet withdrew, as a sign for the guests to leave the bridal 
pair alone together, he told ‘All not to approach his wife until he himself 
returned, which he did shortly after the last guest had departed. Umm 
Ayman was still there, helping to set the house in order after the celebra¬ 
tions. The Prophet had many special relationships in his life which were 
not shared by any except himself and the person in question. One of these 
was with Umm Ayman. When he asked permission to enter, it was she who 
now came to the entrance. “Where is my brother?” he said. “My father 
and my mother be thy ransom, O Messenger of God,” she said, “who is thy 
brother?” “Abu Talib’s son ‘All,” he said. “How can he be thy brother,” 
she said, “when thou hast even now married thy daughter to him?” “He 
is what I said,” replied the Prophet, and asked her to bring him some water, 
which she did. Having taken a mouthful and rinsed his mouth, he spat it 
back into the vessel. Then, when ‘All came, he bade him sit in front of him; 
and taking some of the water in his hand he sprinkled it over his shoulders 
and breast and arms. Then he called Fatimah to him and she came, tripping 
over her robe in the awe and reverence she had for her father. He did the 
same to her as to ‘Alt, and invoked blessings upon them both and upon 
their offspring. 1 

In the year which followed the return from Badr the family of ‘Umar 
suffered two losses. The first of these was the death of his son-in-law 
Khunays, the husband of his daughter Hafsah. He had been one of the 
emigrants to Abyssinia, and it was on his return that the marriage had 
taken place. Hafsah was only eighteen years old when she became a 
widow. She was both beautiful and accomplished, having learned like her 
father to read and write; and seeing that the death of Ruqayyah had left 
‘Uthman so disconsolate, ‘Umar offered him Hafsah in marriage. ‘Uthman 
said that he would think about it, but after some days he came to ‘Umar 
and said he thought it was better that he should not marry again for the 
moment. ‘Umar was very disappointed and also somewhat hurt by 
‘Uthman’s refusal. But he was determined to find a good husband for his 
daughter so he went to Abu Bakr, whom he counted as his best friend, and 
proposed the match to him. Abu Bakr answered him evasively, which hurt 
‘Umar’s feelings even more than ‘Uthman’s definite refusal, though at the 
same time it was more understandable, for Abu Bakr already had one wife, 
to whom he was deeply attached, whereas ‘Uthman was now single. 


1 I.S. VIII, iz—15. 



Deaths and Marriages 165 

Perhaps he could be made to change his mind, and the next time ‘Umar was 
with the Prophet he gave vent to his grievance. “Behold,” said the Prophet, 
“I will show thee a better son-in-law than ‘Uthman, and I will show him a 
better father-in-law than thee.” “So be it!” said ‘Umar with a smile of 
happiness when, after a moment’s reflection, he divined that the better 
man referred to in both cases was none other than the Prophet, who would 
himself take Hafsah to wife and who would become, for the second time, 
the father-in-law of ‘Uthman by giving him in marriage Ruqayyah’s sister 
Umm Kulthum. It was after this that Abu Bakr explained the reason for his 
silence to ‘Umar, namely that the Prophet had confided to him, as a secret 
not yet to be divulged, his intention to ask for the hand of Hafsah. 

The marriage of Umm Kulthum and ‘Uthman took place first; and when 
the legally necessary four months had elapsed since the death of Khunays, 
and when an apartment had been added to those of Sawdah and ‘A’ishah 
adjoining the Mosque, the Prophet’s own marriage was celebrated, a little 
less than a year after the Battle of Badr. The arrival of Hafsah did not mar 
the harmony of the household. ‘A’ishah was pleased to have a companion 
nearer to her own age, and a lasting friendship was soon developed 
between the two younger wives, while Sawdah, who had been something 
of a mother to ‘A’ishah, now extended a share of her maternal benevolence 
to the newcomer, who was nearly twenty years younger than herself. 

It was about the time of this marriage that ‘Umar’s brother-in-law died, 
Hafsah’s maternal uncle, ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un. Both he and his wife 
Khawlah had always been very close to the Prophet, and ‘Uthman was the 
most ascetic of his Companions. He had been an ascetic before the 
Revelation of Islam, and since his emigration to Medina he had become so 
bent on suppressing earthly desires that he asked permission of the Prophet 
to make himself a eunuch and to spend the rest of his life as a wandering 
beggar. “Hast thou not in me a fair example?” said the Prophet. “And I go 
into women, and I eat meat, and I fast, and I break my fast. He is not of my 
people who maketh men eunuchs or maketh himself a eunuch.” But the 
Prophet had reason to think that ‘Uthman had not fully understood him, 
so on another occasion he put the same question: “Hast thou not in me an 
example?” ‘Uthman fervently assented, then asked what was amiss. 
“Thou fastest every day,” said the Prophet, “and keepest vigil every night 
in prayer.” “Yea, that indeed I do,” said ‘Uthman, for he had heard him 
speak again and again of the merits of fasting and of night prayer. “Do not 
so,” said the Prophet, “for verily thine eyes have their rights over thee, and 
thy body hath its rights, and thy family have their rights. So pray, and 
sleep, and fast, and break fast.” 1 

As an expression of the primordial religion, the Revelation continually 
stressed the importance of giving thanks to God for all the most elementary 
blessings of life. He hath given you hearing and sight and heart knowledge 
that ye may be thankful} 

And of His signs is His creation for you of consorts from amongst 
yourselves, that ye may find rest in them, and His ordaining of love 
between you and mercy. Verily therein are signs for people who reflect . 3 

1 I.S. 111/1,289. 2 XVI, 68. 3 XXX, 21. 



1 66 Muhammad 


Say: Have ye thought, if God made night everlasting upon you till the 
Day of the Resurrection, who is a god beside God to bring you lightf 
Will ye not then hearf Say: Have ye thought, if God made day 
everlasting upon you till the Day of the Resurrection, who is a god 
beside God to bring you a night wherein to restf Will ye not then see? 
And of His mercy hath he made for you night and day, that therein ye 
may rest and that ye may go seek His favours, and that ye may be 
thankful. 1 

For primordial man the natural enjoyments, consecrated by thankful¬ 
ness to God, are modes of worship; and with reference to himself the 
Prophet spoke of the pleasures of the senses and of prayer in the same 
context: “It hath been given me to love perfume and women, and coolness 
hath been brought to mine eyes in the prayer.” 2 

Immediately after the death of ‘Uthman, before his funeral, the Prophet 
went with ‘A’ishah to visit Khawlah, and ‘A’ishah said afterwards: “The 
Prophet kissed ‘Uthman when he was dead, and I saw his tears flowing 
over ‘Uthman’s cheek.” At his funeral the Prophet heard an old woman 
address the dead man with the words “Be glad, O father of Sa’ib, for 
Paradise is thine.” The Prophet turned to her somewhat sharply and said: 
“What giveth thee to know that?” “O Messenger of God,” she protested, 
“it is Abu s-Sa’ib!” “By God,” he said, “we know naught but good of 
him.” Then, to make it clear that his first remark had been in no sense 
directed against ‘Uthman but merely against her for saying more than she 
had right to say he turned to her again and added: “It would have been 
enough for thee to say: “He loved God and His messenger.” 3 

‘Umar confessed to having been somewhat shaken in his high regard for 
his brother-in-law by the fact that he had not been blessed with a martyr’s 
death. He said: “When ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un died without being slain he 
fell immeasurably from my esteem and I said: ‘Behold this man who was 
severest of us all in abstaining from the things of this world, and now he 
hath died and was not slain.’ ” And so he remained in ‘Umar’s opinion until 
the Prophet and Abu Bakr had both died natural deaths, and he up¬ 
braided himself for having lacked a true sense of values, and said to him¬ 
self: “Out upon thee, the best of us die!” - he meant “die naturally” - 
and ‘Uthman returned in his estimation to the place he had formally held. 4 

' XXVIII,71—3. 1 I.S. I/z, nz. See above, p. 141, note. 

J I.S. IIl/i, Z89-90. 4 ibid. 



XLVIII 


The People of 
the Bench 

P ART of one of the long colonnades in the Mosque was now reserved 
for those newcomers who had nowhere to live and no means of 
sustenance. They were known as “the People of the Bench”, Ahl 
as-Suffah , on account of a stone bench which had been placed there for 
their benefit; and since the Mosque was a prolongation 4 Tthe Prophet’s 
own dwelling, he and his household felt especially responsible for this 
growing number of impoverished refugees who lived at their very door, 
whose plight they witnessed daily and who came in ones and twos from all 
directions, drawn by the message of Islam and the reports of him and his 
community which had by now reached the tribes all over Arabia. The news 
of Badr was not without its effect in this way. Consequently it was seldom 
that those who lived in the dwellings adjoining the Mosque could eat their 
fill at any meal. The Prophet used to say: “The food of one is enough for 
two, the food of two enough for four, and the food of four enough for 
eight.” 1 

Just as he loved sweet scents and fragrance in general, so also he was 
exceedingly sensitive to the slightest unpleasantness of odour, especially in 
the breath, in himself and in others. ‘A’ishah said that the first thing he 
would do on entering the house was to take up his tooth-stick which was 
made of green palm wood. When he was on a journey, ‘Abd Allah ibn 
Mas‘ud could well be trusted to have one always in readiness for him. 
The Companions followed his example in the use of the tooth-stick, and 
also in the rinsing of the mouth after every meal. 

Hunger made no difference to his extreme sensitivity, which he did not 
always expect others to share. There were certain kinds of food which the 
law allowed and which he encouraged his companions to eat but would 
not eat himself, such as the large lizards which were not to be found in 
Mecca but which were common in Yathrib and elsewhere. Sometimes he 
would refuse a dish more out of consideration for others than himself. 
Once a stew was brought to him as a gift from one of the Helpers but just as 
he was about to take some of it he noticed that it had a strong smell of 
garlic and withdrew his hand. Those who were with him immediately did 


M. XXXVI, 176. 



168 Muhammad 


the same. “What is amiss?” he said to them. “Thou withdrewest thy 
hand,” they said, “so we have withdrawn ours.” “Eat in the name of 
God,” he said. “I hold intimate converse with one whom ye converse not 
with.” 1 They knew he was referring to the Angel. On that occasion the dish 
had been prepared and must not be wasted. He none the less discouraged 
them in general from eating food that was overflavoured with garlic or 
onions, especially before going to the Mosque. 2 

Fatimah before her marriage had been as it were hostess to the People of 
the Bench. But despite the sacrifices that were part of the daily life of the 
Prophet’s household, her life after her marriage seemed even more rigor¬ 
ous on account of a lack which she had not yet experienced. There had 
never been, for her, any shortage of helping hands. In addition to her sister, 
Umm Kulthum, Umm Ayman had been there, always ready to do what she 
could. Umm Sulaym had given her ten-year-old son Anas as servant to the 
Prophet, and Anas was diligent and thoughtful far beyond his years, while 
his mother and Abu Talhah, her second husband, were always in the 
background, ready to help. Ibn Mas‘ud had attached himself to the 
Prophet so closely as to be almost one of the household; and recently, after 
his return to Mecca, ‘Abbas had sent his slave Abu Rafi‘ to the Prophet as a 
gift. The Prophet had set him free, but freedom had not diminished his 
readiness to serve. There was also Khawlah, the widow of ‘Uthman ibn 
Maz‘un, who had long considered herself as their servant. But now 
Fatimah had no one in the house to help her. To relieve their extreme 
poverty, ‘All earned some money as a drawer and carrier of water, and she 
as a grinder of corn. “I have ground until my hands are blistered,” she said 
to ‘All one day, “I have drawn water until I have pains in my chest,” said 
‘All, “and God hath given thy father some captives, so go thou and ask him 
to give thee a servant.” Not very readily she went to the Prophet, who said: 
“What hath brought thee here, little daughter?” “I came to give thee 
greetings of peace,” she said, for in her awe of him she could not bring 
herself to ask what she had intended. “What didst thou do?” said ‘All, 
when she returned empty-handed. “I was ashamed to ask him,” she said, 
so the two of them went together, but the Prophet felt that they were less in 
need than others. “I will not give to you,” he said, “and let the People of the 
Bench be tormented with hunger. I have not enough for their keep; but I 
will spend on them what may come from the selling of the captives.” 

They returned home in some disappointment but that night, after they 
had gone to bed, they heard the voice of the Prophet asking permission to 
enter. Giving him words of welcome they both rose to their feet, but he told 
them: “Stay where ye are,” and sat down beside them. “Shall I not tell you 
of something better than that which ye asked of me?” he said, and when 
they said yes he said: “Words which Gabriel taught me, that ye should say 
Glory be to God ten times after every prayer, and ten times Praise be to 
God , and ten times God is most great. And that when ye go to bed ye 
should say them thirty-three times each.” ‘All used to say in after years: “I 
have never once failed to say them since the Messenger of God taught them 
to us.” 3 

1 I.S.I/2., no. 2 B. XCVI, 24. ^ i.s. VIII, 16._ 



The People of the Bench 169 

Their house was not very far from the Mosque, but the Prophet would 
have liked his daughter to be still nearer to him, and some months after the 
marriage Harithah of Khazraj, a distant kinsman of the Prophet, came to 
him and said: “O Messenger of God, I have heard that thou wouldst fain 
bring Fatimah nearer to thee, and this my house is the nearest of all the 
dwellings of the sons of Najjar, and it is thine. I and my goods are all for 
God and for His Messenger, and I hold dearer what thou takest from me 
than what thou leavest with me.” The Prophet blessed him and accepted 
his gift, and brought his daughter and son-in-law to live as his neighbours. 

He greatly rejoiced in the generosity of Harithah, and in the many other 
acts of generosity in Medina, both towards himself and towards others. 
One of these, however, which took place at this time, was fraught with 
some disappointment. The Prophet had a high opinion of Abu Lubabah of 
Aws, and on the way to Badr he had sent him back from Rawha’ to take 
charge of Medina in his absence. Later that year an orphan under the 
guardianship of Abu Lubabah came to the Prophet and claimed the 
ownership of a certain lavishly fruiting palm-tree, which he said that his 
guardian had wrongly appropriated. They sent for Abu Lubabah who said 
that the palm belonged to him, as in fact it did. The Prophet heard the case 
and gave judgement in favour of the guardian and against the orphan, who 
was sadly grieved for the loss of the tree that he had always considered to 
be his. Seeing this, the Prophet asked for the palm as a gift to himself, 
intending to present it to the orphan, but Abu Lubabah refused. “O Abu 
Lubabah,” he said, “give it then thou the orphan, and its like shall be thine 
in Paradise.” But Abu Lubabah’s sense of legal justice had been too much 
roused by the whole affair for him to agree, and again he refused, 
whereupon another of the Helpers, Thabit ibn ad-Dahdahah, said to the 
Prophet: “O Messenger of God, if I should buy this palm and give it to this 
orphan, would mine be its like in Paradise?” “It would indeed,” came the 
answer, so he went to Abu Lubabah and offered him an orchard of palms 
for the single tree. The offer was accepted, and Ibn ad-Dahdahah gave the 
palm to the orphan. 1 The Prophet was exceedingly glad for his sake, but 
saddened on account of Abu Lubabah. 


1 W.505. 



XLIX 


Desultory Warfare 


4 N important secondary result of Badr and of the expeditions which 
ZA preceded it was that Juhaynah and the other neighbouring Red Sea 
X A. tribes were now firmly allied with Medina. This meant that the 
coastal road to Syria was virtually barred to the Meccan caravans; and it 
raised the question: Would it not be possible to reduce the power of 
Quraysh still further by barring them from all access to the north, on the 
•east as well as on the west? This latent danger had by no means escaped the 
notice of Quraysh themselves, and they had already taken some steps to 
strengthen their alliances with Sulaym and Ghatafan through whose 
territory the caravans had to pass if they took the north-easterly route to 
the head of the Persian Gulf and thence to Iraq. These tribes lived in the 
great plain of Najd to the east of Mecca and Medina. Caravans from 
Mecca would make their seventh halt in the middle of the fertile tract 
which was occupied by Sulaym; and this tribe in particular was now T urged 
by Quraysh to let slip no opportunity of harrying the borders of Yathrib 
wherever they seemed to be most vulnerable. 

During the next months the Prophet had warning of three projected 
raids on the eastern fringes of the oasis, two by Sulaym and one by 
Ghatafan. In every case he forestalled them by marching out at once into 
their territory, and in every case they had news of his approach and 
vanished before he reached their point of gathering. But one of these 
expeditions was none the less remarkably successful. It was against the 
Ghatafan! tribes of Tha‘labah and Muharib, and this time the Prophet 
decided to follow the elusive Bedouin into their half hidden fastnesses in 
the hills to the north of Najd, with the help of a man of Tha‘labah who 
entered Islam and offered his services as a guide. From the plain they 
ascended into the Muharib territory, and a sudden fall of rain drenched 
some of the men, including the Prophet, before they could take shelter. The 
Prophet withdrew a little from the others, removed his two wet garments 
and hung them on a tree to dry, while he himself lay down under the tree 
and was soon overcome by sleep. But all their movements and his in 
particular had been watched by many unseen eyes; and he woke to find a 
man standing over him with a drawn sword. It was none other than 
Du‘thur, the chief of Muharib, who had himself been largely responsible 
for planning the projected raid of which the Prophet had had warning. “O 
Muhammad,” he said, “who will protect thee from me this day?” “God,” 
said the Prophet, whereupon Gabriel, clothed all in white, appeared 



Desultory Warfare 171 

between them and, placing his hand on the man’s chest, he thrust him 
backwards. The sword fell from his grasp, and the Prophet seized it. 
Gabriel vanished from Du‘thur’s sight and he realised that he had seen an 
Angel. “Who will protect thee from me?” said the Prophet. “Nobody,” 
said Du‘thur. “I testify that there is no god but God, and that Muhammad 
is the messenger of God.” The Prophet handed him back his sword, which 
touched the man deeply. They went together to the camp, and Du‘thur was 
instructed in the religion. Then he returned to his people, and began to 
summon them to Islam. 

By the time that the army had returned from Najd, Ka‘b ibn al-Ashraf 
had left Mecca, and had returned to his fortress among the Bani Nadir, not 
far from the outskirts of Medina. In addition to his poems urging Quraysh 
to take revenge for Badr, he wrote others satirising the Prophet and his 
Companions; and among the Arabs a gifted poet was like a multitude of 
men, for his verses were repeated from mouth to mouth. If good, he was a 
power for good; if evil, a power for evil, to be suppressed at all costs. The 
Prophet prayed: “O Lord, deliver me from the son of al-Ashraf howsoever 
Thou wilt, for the evil he declareth and the poems he declaimeth.” Then he 
said to those who were present: “Who is for me against the son of 
al-Ashraf, for he hath done me great injury?” The first to volunteer was a 
man of Aws, Muhammad ibn Maslamah, of the clan of Sa‘d ibn Mu'adh. 
The Prophet told him to consult Sa‘d, and four more volunteers were 
found. But they realised that nothing could be achieved without deception 
and lies, and they knew that lying was abhorrent to the Prophet; so they 
went to him and told him what was in their minds. He said that they were 
free to say whatever would serve their purpose, for deception was legiti¬ 
mate in warfare, being a part of its strategy, and Ka‘b had declared war on 
them. 

Ka‘b was lured out of his fortress under false pretences, and then killed. 
In indignation and in panic the Jews of Nadir went to the Prophet and 
complained that one of their chief men had been treacherously done to 
death, without any cause. The Prophet knew well that most of them were 
as hostile to Islam as Ka‘b had been, and with great disappointment he had 
come to accept this. But it was vital to show them that if hostile thoughts 
were tolerable, hostile action was not. “If he had remained as others of like 
opinion remain,” he said, “he would not have been killed by guile. But he 
did us injury and wrote poetry against us; and none of you shall do this but 
he shall be put to the sword.” 1 He then invited them to make a special 
treaty with him in addition to the covenant, and this they did. 


W. 19Z. 



Preparations for 
Battle 


T HE Meccans felt keenly the loss of their Red Sea caravan route. One 
of the disadvantages of the only alternative was that in the plain of 
Najd the wells were relatively far apart. But now that the summer 
months were drawing to a close the journey could easily be managed by 
adding to the number of water-carrying camels; and they decided to send a 
rich caravan to Iraq consisting mainly of bars of silver and silver vessels 
worth about a hundred thousand dirhems. It was to be under the leader¬ 
ship of Safwan. Some of the Jews of Medina had secret information 
about the caravan and one of the Helpers happened to hear them discuss¬ 
ing it. The Prophet knew that Zayd had gifts of leadership, and he now 
sent him at the head of a hundred horse to waylay the caravan near 
Qaradah, which was one of the chief watering places along the route. The 
relatively small and therefore more manageable force made it possible for 
Zayd to realise all the essentials of an effective ambush. Their sudden 
ferocious and unexpected onslaught put to flight Safwan and his fellows, 
while Zayd and his men returned to Medina in triumph, having become 
themselves the escort of all the Meccan transport camels with their rich 
loads of silver and other merchandise, and a few captives. 

In Mecca the disaster of Qaradah intensified and quickened the prepara¬ 
tions which had been in progress ever since Badr for an irresistible attack 
on Medina. The sacred month of Rajab passed and with it midwinter and 
the New Year of ad 625. It was in the following month that Hafsah’s 
marriage took place. Then came Ramadan, and in this month of fasting, to 
the great joy of all the believers, Fatimah gave birth to a son. The Prophet 
spoke the words of the call to prayer into the ear of the new-born babe and 
named him al-Hasan, which means “the beautiful”. The moon reached its 
full, after which, a day or two later, came the anniversary of Badr; and in 
the last days of the month a sealed letter was brought to the Prophet by a 
horseman who had ridden from Mecca to Medina in three days. It was 
from his uncle ‘Abbas, warning him that an army of three thousand men 
was on the point of marching out against Medina. Seven hundred of the 
men were mailed, and there was a troop of horse two hundred strong. The 
camels were as many as the men, not counting the transport camels and 
those which carried howdahs for the women. 



Preparations for Battle 173 

By the time the letter arrived Quraysh had already set out. Abu Sufyan, 
the commander-in-chief, took with him Hind and also a second wife. 
Safwan likewise brought two wives, other chiefs one only. Jubayr the son 
of Mut‘im remained in Mecca; but he sent out with the army an Abyssin¬ 
ian slave of his named WahshI who was, like many of his countrymen, an 
expert at throwing the javelin. WahshI had seldom been known to miss his 
mark; and Jubayr said to him: “If thou slayest Hamzah, Muhammad’s 
uncle, in revenge for mine, thou art a free man.” Hind came to know of 
this, and during their halts, whenever she passed WahshI in the camp or 
saw him passing by, she would say to him: “Go to it, thou father of 
darkness, slake and then gloat!” She had already made it clear to him that 
she also, as well as his master, had a thirst to be slaked and a reward for the 
slaker. 

The Emigrants and Helpers still had a week before the enemy could be 
upon them; but within that time room had to be made inside the walls of 
Medina for all those who lived in the outlying parts of the oasis, together 
with their animals. This was done and not one horse, camel, cow, sheep or 
goat was left outside the walls. It remained to be seen what the Meccan 
plan of action was. News came that they were taking the western route 
near the coast. In due course they turned inland, and made a brief halt 
about five miles west of Medina. Then they marched north-east for a few 
miles and camped on a strip of cultivated land in the plain below Mount 
Uhud, which overlooks Medina from the north. 

The Prophet sent out scouts, who returned the next morning with the 
information that the numbers of the enemy were indeed as the letter had 
stated. Quraysh had with them a hundred men of Thaqlf and also 
contingents from Kinanah and other allies. The three thousand and more 
camels and the two hundred horses were eating all the pasture and all the 
as yet unharvested crops to the north of the city, and soon not a blade of 
greenery would be left. The army showed no signs of being ready for any 
immediate action. None the less, the city was closely guarded that night, 
and the two Sa‘ds of Aws and Khazraj, that is Ibn Mu'adh and Ibn 
‘Ubadah, insisted on keeping watch outside the Prophet’s door, and with 
them was Usayd and a strong bodyguard. 

The Prophet himself was as yet unarmed. But he dreamed that he was 
wearing an impregnable coat of mail and that he was mounted on the back 
of a ram. His sword was in his hand and he noticed a dent in it; and he saw 
some kine which he knew to be his, and they were sacrificed before his eyes. 

The next morning he told his Companions what he had seen, and he 
interpreted it, saying: “The impregnable coat of mail is Medina, and the 
dent in my sword is a blow that will be struck against myself; the sacrificed 
kine are some of my Companions who will be slain; and, as to the ram 
which I rode upon, that is the leader of their squadron whom we shall slay 
if God will”. 1 

His first thought was not to go out from the city, but to stand a siege 
within its walls. He none the less wished to have his opinion confirmed by 
others, for it was by no means a conviction, so he held a consultation as to 


1 W. zo 9 . 



174 Muhammad 

whether they should march out or not. Ibn Ubayy was the first to speak: 
“Our city,” he said, “is a virgin that hath never been violated against us. 
Never without severe losses have we gone out from her to attack an enemy; 
and none have entered her against us but it is they who have suffered the 
losses. Therefore let them be, O Messenger of God. Wretched will be their 
plight, so long as they stay; and when they return they will return dejected 
and frustrated in purpose, with no good gained.” 

A large number of the older Companions, of both the Emigrants and 
Helpers, inclined to the opinion of Ibn Ubayy. So the Prophet said: “Stay in 
Medina, and put the women and children in the fortresses.” Only when he 
had spoken thus did it become apparent that most of the younger men were 
burning with eagerness to march out against the enemy. “O Messenger of 
God,” said one of them, “lead us forth against the enemy. Let them not 
think we fear them or that we are too weak for them.” These words were 
met with a murmur of approval from different parts of the assembly, and 
others said much the same, with the added argument that their inactivity 
and their failure to take reprisal for their devastated crops would only 
serve to embolden Quraysh against them in the future, not to speak of the 
tribes of Najd. Hamzah and Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah and others of the more 
experienced now began to incline towards this view. “At Badr,” said one 
of them, “thou hadst but three hundred men, and God gave thee mastery 
over them. And now we are many and have been hoping for this occasion 
and praying God for it, and He hath sent it to our very door.” 1 Then one of 
the oldest men present rose to speak, a man of Aws named Khaythamah. 
He repeated many of the arguments already given against remaining on the 
defensive. Then he spoke on a more personal note. His son Sa‘d was one of 
the few Muslims who had been slain at Badr. “Last night in my sleep,” he 
said, “I saw my son. Most beautiful was his appearance, and I witnessed 
how it was given to him to fulfil his every wish amid the fruits and the 
rivers of the Garden. And he said: ‘Come unto us and be our companion in 
Paradise. All that my Lord promised me have I found to be true.’ And I am 
old and I long to meet my Lord, so pray O messenger of God, that He will 
grant me martyrdom and the company of Sa‘d in Paradise.” 2 The Prophet 
made a prayer for Khaythamah, no doubt a silent one, for the words are 
not recorded. Then another of the Helpers rose to speak, this time a man of 
Khazraj, Malik ibn Sinan. “O Messenger of God,” he said, “we have 
before us one of two good things: either God will grant us the mastery over 
them, and that is what we would have; or else God will grant us 
martyrdom. I care not which it may be, for verily there is good in both.” 3 

It was now clear, not only from the words that were spoken but from the 
general approval with which they were received, that the majority were 
against remaining behind the city walls, and the Prophet decided to attack. 
At noon they assembled for the Friday prayer, and the theme of his sermon 
was the Holy War and all that it demands of earnestness and effort; and he 
said that victory would be theirs if they remained steadfast. Then he bade 
them make ready to meet the enemy. 

After the prayer two men waited behind to speak to the Prophet, each 


1 W.2IO-II. 


1 W. 212—13. 


3 ibid. 



Preparations for Battle 175 

having an urgent decision to make. One of them was Hanzalah, the son of 
the self-styled Abrahamist Abu ‘Amir, who was even now, unknown to his 
son, in the enemy camp below Uhud. It was Hanzalah’s wedding day - a 
day which had been chosen some weeks in advance. He was betrothed to 
his cousin Jamllah, the daughter of Ibn Ubayy, and he was loth to postpone 
the marriage, yet determined to fight. The Prophet told him to celebrate his 
marriage and spend the night in Medina. There could be no fighting before 
sunrise, and Hanzalah would have ample time to join him on the battle¬ 
field early the next morning. He could find out by inquiry which way the 
army had passed. 

The other man was ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amr of the Bani Salimah, one of the 
clans of Khazraj. It was he who nearly three years previously had gone out 
on the Pilgrimage as a pagan, and had entered Islam in the valley of Mina, 
where he had forthwith pledged allegiance to the Prophet at the Second 
‘Aqabah. And now, two or three nights previously, ‘Abd Allah had had a 
dream not unlike that which Khaythamah had recounted in the assembly. 
A man had come to him in his sleep and he recognised him as a Helper 
named Mubashshir, who said to him: “A few days, and thou shalt come 
unto us.” “And where art thou?” said ‘Abd Allah. “In Paradise,” said 
Mubashshir. “We do there all that it pleaseth us to do.” “Wast thou not 
slain at Badr?” said ‘Abd Allah. “Even so,” said Mubashshir, “but then 
was I brought to life.” “Father of Jabir,” said the Prophet to ‘Abd Allah 
when he told him the dream, “that is martyrdom.” 1 ‘Abd Allah knew this 
in his heart, but he wished none the less to have it confirmed by the 
Prophet. Then he went home to make ready for war and to bid farewell to 
his children. His wife had died recently, leaving him with one son, Jabir, 
now just grown to manhood, and seven daughters much younger than 
their brother. Jabir had already returned from the Mosque, and was busy 
about his weapons and his armour. Not having been present at Badr, he 
was all the more eager to go out with the Prophet on this occasion. But his 
father had other thoughts. “My son,” he said, “it is not meet that we 
should leave them” - he meant his daughters - “without a man. They are 
young and helpless, and I fear for them. But I shall go out with the 
Messenger of God, perchance to be martyred if God grant it me, so I leave 
them to thy care.” 

They all assembled again for the afternoon prayer, and by that time the 
men from Upper Medina had mustered and were present in the Mosque. 
After the prayer the Prophet took Abu Bakr and ‘Umar with him into his 
house and they helped him to dress for battle. The men lined up outside; 
and Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh and his clansmen reproved them saying: “Ye have 
compelled the Messenger of God to go out against his will, albeit the 
command cometh down to him from Heaven. Put back the decision into 
his hands and let him decide afresh.” When the Prophet came out, he had 
wound his turban about his helmet and donned his breastplate, under 
which he wore a coat of mail belted with a leather sword-belt. He had even 
girt on his sword and slung his shield across his back. Many of the men by 
that time had regretted the course they had taken, and as soon as he 


1 W. 266 . 



176 Muhammad 

appeared they said: “O Messenger of God, it is not for us to oppose thee in 
aught, so do what seemeth best to thee.” But he answered them saying: “It 
is not for a Prophet, when he hath put on his armour, to take it off until 
God hath judged between him and his enemies. So look to what I bade you 
do, and do it, and go forward in the Name of God. The victory is yours, if 
ye be steadfast.” 1 Then he called for three lances and fastened upon them 
three banners. The banner of Aws he gave to Usayd, that of Khazraj to 
Hubab, who had advised him about the wells at Badr, and that of the 
Emigrants to Mus‘ab. Again he appointed the blind ‘Abd Allah ibn Umm 
Maktum to lead the prayers in his absence. Then he mounted his horse 
Sakb, 2 and asked for his bow, which he hung over his shoulder, taking in 
his hand a spear. No other man was mounted. The two Sa’ds marched irt 
front of him, and there were men on either side. In all they were about a 
thousand strong. 

1 W.Z14. 

2 Running Water, so called because he could amble. 



LI 


The March to Uhud 


T HE sun was already setting when they reached Shaykhayn, half¬ 
way between Medina and Uhud. Bilal made the call to prayer and 
they prayed, after which the Prophet reviewed his troops. It was 
then that he noticed the presence of eight boys who, despite their age, were 
hoping to take part in the battle. Amongst them were Zayd’s son Usamah 
and ‘Umar’s son ‘Abd Allah, both only thirteen years old. The Prophet 
ordered them and their six friends to return home immediately. They 
protested, and one of the Helpers assured the Prophet that the fifteen-year- 
old Rafi‘, of the Awsite clan of Harithah, was already a better archer than 
some of his elders. So Rafi‘ was allowed to stay, whereupon Samurah, an 
orphan from one of the Najd tribes, whose mother had married a Helper of 
Rafi°s clan, claimed that he could throw Rafi‘ in wrestling. The Prophet 
told the two boys to show him what they could do, so they set about each 
other then and there; and Samurah proved his claim to be true, so he also 
was allowed to stay, while the others were sent back to their families. 

The Meccans were hoping that the Muslims would come out against 
them and so enable them to use their greater strength, and in particular 
their cavalry, to the best possible advantage. The Prophet was aware of this 
and, having none the less decided to leave the city, he was determined to 
compensate for the disparity of numbers by taking up a position which 
would give his army an advantage and which would at the same time be 
unexpected and therefore disconcerting to the enemy. But for his purpose 
he would need a guide, so he made some inquiries, and since they would 
have to pass through the territory of the Bani Harithah he accepted the 
offered services of a member of that clan who knew the lie of the land to 
perfection. 

In Medina that night Hanzalah and Jamllah had consummated their 
marriage; and in her sleep, during the small hours, Jamllah had a dream in 
which she saw her husband standing at the outside of Heaven; and a door 
opened for him and he entered through it, whereupon it closed behind him. 
When she woke, she said to herself: “This is martyrdom.” They performed 
their ablutions and prayed the dawn prayer together, after which he bade 
her farewell. But she clung to him, and would not let him go, and again he 
lay with her. Then he tore himself from her embrace, and not even staying 
to repeat his ablution, he put on his coat of mail, seized his weapons, and 
hastened from the house. 1 


1 W.Z73- 



178 Muhammad 

The Prophet had given instructions that the army should be ready to 
move off from Shaykhayn shortly before dawn. But Ibn Ubayy had been in 
consultation with some of his nearest followers during the night, and when 
it was time to raise camp he turned back to Medina with three hundred of 
the hypocrites and doubters, to the great shame of his son ‘Abd Allah, who 
remained with the army. Ibn Ubayy did not even speak to the Prophet, and 
when questioned by some of the Helpers he said: “He hath disobeyed me, 
and obeyed the striplings and men of no judgement. I see not why we 
should lose our lives in this ill chosen spot.” Another Abd Allah, the father 
of Jabir, went after them and called out: “I adjure you by God not to desert 
your people and your Prophet in the very presence of the enemy.” But they 
only answered: “If we knew that ye would be fighting, we would not leave 
you. But we do not think there will be a battle.” “Enemies of God”, he 
retorted, “God will avail His Prophet beyond any need of you.” 

Reduced now to seven hundred, the army advanced for a short distance 
towards the enemy and then, still under cover of the darkness, they moved 
to their right and made their way across a volcanic tract until they came to 
the south-easterly end of the gorge of Uhud. Turning again they advanced 
north-west up the gorge until in the half-light of dawn they saw the 
Meccan camp ahead of them, a little to their left and a little below them. 
They marched on until they were directly between the enemy and Uhud. 
Having now reached his objective, which was to have the slope of the 
ground in his favour, the Prophet halted them and dismounted. Bilal made 
the call to the morning prayer, and they moved into lines with their backs 
to the mountain. This was also their formation for battle, since the enemy 
were now between them and Mecca. Having led the prayer, the Prophet 
turned and exhorted them, saying: “Verily this day ye are at a station that 
is rich in reward and rich in treasure, for him who is mindful of what he is 
about and who devoteth his soul thereunto in patience and certainty and 
earnestness and effort.” 1 When he had finished, Hanzalah went forward to 
greet him, for he had just arrived from Medina. 

The Prophet now chose out his best archers: of these he attached to 
himself Zayd, Sa‘d his cousin of Zuhrah, and Sa’ib the son of ‘Uthman ibn 
Maz‘un amongst others; but he told fifty of them to take up their position 
on a rise a little to the left of his main force. He put over them ‘Abd Allah 
ibn Jubayr, a man of Aws, and gave them their orders, saying: “Keep their 
cavalry from us with your arrows. Let them not come upon us from our 
rear. Be the tide of battle for us or against us, stay at this post! If ye see us 
plundering the enemy, seek not to have a share in it; and if ye see us being 
slain, come not to our aid.” 2 

Having put on another coat of mail he took up a sword and brandished 
it, saying: “Who will take this sword, together with its right?” Immediate¬ 
ly ‘Umar went to take it, but the Prophet turned away from him, saying 
again: “Who will take this sword, together with its right?” Zubayr said he 
would take it, but again the Prophet turned away, repeating his question a 
third time. “What is its right,” O Messenger of God?” said Abu Dujanah, a 
man of Khazraj. “Its right,” said the Prophet, “is that thou shouldst strike 


W. 2.2.X. 


2 I.I.560. 



The March to Uhud 179 

the foe with it until its blade be bent.” “I will take it, together with its 
right,” he said, and the Prophet gave it to him. He was a valiant man, who 
gloried in battle. His red turban was well known, and among the Khazraj 
it was called the turban of death. When he put it on, as now he did, wind¬ 
ing it round his helmet, they knew that he meant to inflict great slaughter 
on the enemy; and none could doubt that this was his firm intention as 
sword in hand he strutted up and down between the lines. Seeing him, the 
Prophet said: “That is a gait which God detesteth, save at such a time and 
place as this.” 1 

1 I.I.561. 



LII 


The Battle of Uhud 


T HE sun was now up and Quraysh were already in line, with a 
hundred horse on either wing, commanded on the right by Khalid, 
son of Walld, and on the left by ‘Ikrimah, son of Abu Jahl. From the 
centre Abu Sufyan gave the order to advance. In front of him Talhah of 
‘Abd ad-Dar carried the banner of Quraysh, and two of Talhah’s brothers 
and four of his sons were in close attendance, each ready to take his turn if 
need be. Talhah and his brothers were determined to win glory for their 
clan that day. At Badr their two standard-bearers had ingloriously let 
themselves be taken prisoner, and Abu Sufyan had not failed to remind 
them of this on the way to Uhud. Mus‘ab recognised his fellow clansmen 
from where he stood in front of the Prophet with the banner of the 
Emigrants. 

As soon as the two hosts were within earshot of each other, Abu Sufyan 
halted his advance and stepped a little ahead of the standard. “Men of Aws 
and Khazraj,” he said, “quit ye now the field, and leave to me my cousin. 
Then we will be gone from you, for we have no call to fight you.” But the 
Helpers answered him with a roll of thunderous abuse. Then another man 
stepped forward from the Meccan ranks, and Hanzalah was grieved to 
recognise his father, who now proclaimed his presence: “Men of Aws, I am 
Abu ‘Amir!” He could not believe that his influence, once so considerable, 
had gone to nothing, and he had promised Quraysh that as soon as he 
made himself known many of the men of his clan would rally to his side. 
Instead, he received not only curses but a volley of stones which drove him 
back in dismay. 

Again the order was given for the Meccans to advance, and not far from 
the front lines the women, led by Hind, also moved forward, beating their 
timbrels and their drums and chanting: 

On, ye sons of ‘Abd ad-Dar; 

Onwards, ye that guard the rear; 

Smite, with every sharp sword smite. 

Then when the women felt they had reached their limit of nearness to the 
enemy they marked time to the beat of their drums, letting the men 
advance beyond them, and Hind started up a song which had been sung by 
another Hind in one of the wars of old: 



The Battle of Uhud 181 

Advance and we embrace you, 

And soft carpets spread. 

But turn your backs, we leave you, 

Leave you and not love you. 

When the two armies were almost joined the Prophet’s archers shot a 
volley of arrows into Khalid’s cavalry, and the neighing of horses drowned 
the women’s voices and their drums. From the Meccan centre Talhah 
strode forward and shouted for a man to meet him in single combat. ‘All 
went out to meet him, and finally felled him to the ground with a blow that 
cut through his helmet and split his skull. The Prophet knew at once that 
this was “the leader of the squadron” — the ram that had been subjected to 
him in his dream - and in a loud voice he magnified God, Allahu akbar , 
and his magnification was echoed throughout the host. But the ram had 
signified not only one victim, for Talhah’s brother now took his banner 
and he was cut down by Hamzah. Then Sa‘d of Zuhrah put an arrow 
through the neck of Talhah’s second brother, and his four sons were killed 
one after the other by ‘All and Zubayr and ‘Asim ibn Thabit of Aws. Two 
of them were carried dying to. their mother Sulafah, who was now in the 
rear; and when they told her who had dealt them their mortal wounds she 
vowed that one day she would drink wine out of ‘Asim’s skull. 

No woman had been allowed to set out with the Muslims on the 
previous day. But Nusaybah, a woman of Khazraj, felt that her place was 
none the less with the army. Her husband Ghaziyyah and two of her sons 
were there, but that was not the reason. Other women had husbands and 
sons in the army and were content to stay at home. But Nusaybah had been 
one of the two women who had gone out with the seventy men of Medina 
to the Second ‘Aqabah, nor could she find it in her nature to stay behind on 
this occasion. So she had risen early that morning, and having filled a skin 
with water she set off for the battlefield where she would at least be able to 
tend the wounded and give drink to the thirsty. She took with her none the 
less a sword and also a bow and a quiver of arrows. Following by inquiry 
the way that the army had taken, she reached without difficulty, not long 
after the battle had begun, the place at the foot of the mountain where the 
Prophet had now taken up his position on a piece of relatively high ground, 
with Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and others of his closest Companions. The mother 
of Anas, Umm Sulaym, had had the same idea and arrived with her skin of 
water not long after Nusaybah. The group behind the lines was also joined 
by two men of Muzaynah, one of the Bedouin tribes to the west of the 
oasis. They were both recent converts to Islam, and not knowing of the 
Meccan attack they had gone to Medina that dawn to find the city more 
than half empty. On hearing why, they immediately set out for Uhud, and 
having greeted the Prophet they drew their swords ahd went forward into 
the fray. 

Abu Dujanah was being true to the promise of his red turban. Zubayr 
admitted afterwards: “I was hurt within my soul when I asked the 
Messenger of God for the sword and he kept it from me and gave it to Abu 
Dujanah and I said to myself: I am the son of Safiyyah, his father’s sister, 
and I am of Quraysh; and I went to him and asked him for it before the 



i8z Muhammad 


other man, yet he gave it to him and set me aside. By God, I will go see what 
Abu Dujanah is about! And so I followed him.” He then told how Abu 
Dujanah killed every man he encountered as easily as if he had been a 
reaper and his sword a scythe, and how he himself was reconciled to the 
Prophet’s decision and told himself: “God and His Messenger know best.” 

Hind, a large woman of imposing appearance, was still in the midst of 
the men, urging them on to fight, and she narrowly escaped being cut down 
by Abu Dujanah, who thought she was a man. His sword was raised above 
her head when she shrieked, and, realising that she was a woman, he 
turned against the men at her side. She now joined the other wives and 
mothers in the rear, where the slaves had been put to guard the camp; and, 
as she retreated, WahshI, the Abyssinian, was making his way forward. 
Unlike the rest of those on the field, he was concerned with one man only, 
and unlike them his blood was cold. Hamzah was unmistakable for his 
unusually powerful stature, for his manner of fighting and for his ostrich 
plume. WahshI saw him from a distance and while keeping to the edge of 
the fray he was able to reach a point of relative safety that was none the less 
close enough for a javelineer to strike. Hamzah was now face to face with 
the last of the standard-bearers of ‘Abd ad-Dar, and as he lifted his sword 
to strike he momentarily laid open a chink in his armour. WahshI was 
quick to see his chance, and poising his javelin he launched it with perfect 
aim. Hamzah staggered a few paces forward, having already killed his 
man, and fell to the ground in the throes of death. WahshI waited until his 
body stopped moving, and then went and drew out his javelin and returned 
with all speed to the camp. As he himself said: “I had done all I had come to 
do, and I only killed him for the sake of my freedom.” 

The death of Hamzah made little difference to the sense of defeat which 
was beginning to spread through the Meccan army. Another Abyssinian, a 
slave of the family of the seven dead standard-bearers, now took up the 
standard himself, but he was soon killed and for a while it lay unheeded on 
the ground; and although Hamzah’s ostrich feather was no longer to be 
seen, Abu Dujanah, Zubayr and others of the Emigrants and Helpers 
fought like incarnations of the Muslim battle-cry that day, Amit , Amit , 
which means “Kill, Kill”. It seemed that none could resist them: ‘All’s 
white plume, Abu Dujanah’s red turban, the bright yellow turban of 
Zubayr and the green turban of Hubab were like flags of victory which 
gave strength to the ranks behind them. Abu Sufyan narrowly escaped the 
sword of Hanzalah, who was fighting valiantly near the centre and who 
was about to cut him down, when a man of Layth came in from the side 
and thrust Hanzalah through with his spear, felling him to the ground and 
killing him outright with a second thrust. 

The battle had gradually moved down the slope away from the Prophet 
as the Meccans were driven back towards their camp. He could no longer 
discern in any detail what was happening, though he could see that so far 
his men were winning the day. But now his attention was drawn upwards 
from the battle and his eyes were raised as one who watches the flight of 
birds. After a moment he said to those beside him: “Your companion” — he 
meant Hanzalah - “the Angels are washing him.” 1 And afterwards he 

1 1.1. 568. 



The Battle of Uhud 183 


said to Jamllah, as if seeking an explanation: “I saw the Angels washing 
Hanzalah between heaven and earth with water from the clouds in vessels 
of silver.” 1 Then she told him of her dream, and how through fear of being 
late for the battle, he had not made the ablution he would normally have 
made. 

The Muslims continued to advance until at one point the enemy lines 
were broken altogether. The way to their camp was thus laid open, and 
there was a surge forward of would-be plunderers. Now the fifty chosen 
archers were at some distance to the left of the Prophet. Between him and 
them the ground sloped down to the plain and then rose up to the point of 
vantage at which he had placed them. They could see the first lines, and the 
sight of their fellows about to enrich themselves, as they thought, with 
enemy spoils, was too much for most of them. In vain their commander, 
‘Abd Allah ibn Jubayr, reminded them of the Prophet’s order not to leave 
their post on any account. They replied that the Prophet had not meant 
them to stay there for ever. The battle was now finished, they said, and the 
disbelievers routed. About forty of them sped down the slope in the 
direction of the camp, leaving ‘Abd Allah at the head of a staunch but 
fatally depleted nucleus of bowmen. 

So far the Meccan cavalry had been of no avail. In the centre the two 
armies were so interwoven that a charge of horse would have endangered 
their own men as well as their enemies; and they could not reach the rear of 
the Muslim army without first exposing themselves to the shafts of the 
archers over a long stretch of ground. But Khalid saw what now had 
happened, and realising that his moment had come, he led his men at full 
gallop for the post where the archers were stationed. ‘Abd Allah and his 
men vainly tried to head them off with their arrows; then they threw down 
their bows and fought to the death with sword and spear. Not one of the 
faithful ten was left alive; and wheeling round, Khalid led his men into the 
rear of their enemy’s main force. ‘Ikrimah followed his example, and the 
Meccan horsemen made much havoc in the unguarded ranks of the believers. 
‘All and his companions now turned to face the new danger, and some of 
the idolaters who had been put to flight rallied and came back into the fray. 
The tide of battle had suddenly changed, and the Quraysh war-cry “O 
‘Uzzah! O Hubal!” was taken up again all over the field. Many of the 
Muslims in the rear who had escaped being cut down by the horsemen now 
lost heart and fled towards the mountain, where they knew they could find 
refuge. The Prophet called to them to return, but their ears were closed to 
his voice, nor were their minds open to any thought but flight. The 
majority of the Muslims fought on, but the initial impetus was now lost, 
and the weight of numbers told against them. They were driven back step 
by step, and the whole battle moved towards Uhud in the direction of the 
Prophet. 

He and his Companions, including the two women, shot volley after 
volley of arrows into the enemy, and their group was increased by others 
from the main force whose chief thought, when the day turned against 
them, had been the safety of the Prophet. Among the first to join them were 
the two men of Muzaynah, Wahb and Harith. A small body of enemy 

1 W.Z74- 



184 Muhammad 

horse now approached from the left. “Who is for this detachment?” said 
the Prophet. “I am, O Messenger of God,” was the instant reply of Wahb, 
and he shot at them with such speed and dexterity that his arrows came 
upon them as from a group of archers and they withdrew. “Who is for this 
squadron?” said the Prophet as another body of horse made for them. “I 
am, O Messenger of God,” said Wahb, and again he fought as if he were 
not one man but many, and again they withdrew. Then yet a third troop 
emerged from the lines. “Who will stand up to these?” said the Prophet. “I 
will,” said Wahb. “Arise then,” said the Prophet, “and rejoice, for 
Paradise is thine.” And Wahb rose joyfully saying, as he drew his sword: 
“By God, I give no quarter and I seek no quarter.” Then he plunged into 
their midst and fought his way through them and out at the other side 
while the Prophet and his Companions stopped their shooting to gaze at 
his prowess and his valour. “O God, have Mercy upon him!” said the 
Prophet, as Wahb returned into the midst of the troop, fighting on until 
they hemmed him in on all sides and killed him. He was found afterwards 
with twenty lance thrusts, any one of which would have sufficed, apart 
from what the swords had done to him. No one who saw his fighting ever 
forgot it. ‘Umar would say in after years: “Of all deaths the one I would 
most fain have died was the Muzaynite’s death.” 1 And Sa’d of Zuhrah 
claimed ten years later that he still carried in his ears the sound of the 
Prophet’s voice giving Wahb the good tidings of Paradise. 

The main body of the fray had come gradually nearer as the Muslims 
were slowly driven backwards up the slope. Amid the battle-cries of both 
sides the individual shouts of the fighters could also be heard - challenges 
to single combat or the staking of claims in arrows shot or blows struck. 
“Take that: and I am the son of so-and-so.” Abu Dujanah styled himself as 
the son of Kharashah, who was his grandfather. Not seldom the identity of 
the claimant was left uncertain. One of the Ansar, that is the Helpers, was 
heard to shout: “Take that: and I am the Ansar! lad.” The Prophet himself 
said that day, on at least one occasion: “I am Ibn al-‘Awatik,” 2 which 
means “I am the son of the ‘Atikahs,” referring to his many ancestresses 3 of 
that name. But now there came a challenge of unmistakable identity as a 
single horseman emerged from the lines and said: ‘Who will come forth 
against me?_I am the son of ‘Atiq.” It was ‘ Abd al-Ka’bah, the eldest son of 
Abu Bakr, ‘ A’ishah’s only full brother, the one member of their family who 
had not entered Islam. Abu Bakr threw down his bow and drawing his 
sword would have gone to the attack but the Prophet was too quick for 
him. “Sheathe thy sword,” he said, “and go back to thy place, and give us 
the good of thy company.” 4 

Another body of horse broke through the rear of the Muslims, and 
advanced in front of ‘Abd al-Ka’bah, who now withdrew. “Which of you 
will sell himself for us?” 5 said the Prophet, and five of the Helpers drew 
their swords, threw themselves on the enemy, and fought till they were 

1 W. 275. z W. 280. 

3 I.S. I/i, 32—4, gives more than ten, including the mother of Hashim and the mother of 

Lu’ayy. The name ‘Atikah is similar in meaning to Tahirah, “the Pure”. 

4 W. 257. s I.I. 572. 



The Battle of Uhud 185 

killed, except for one, who was mortally wounded. But help was at hand to 
replace them, for ‘All, Zubayr, Talhah and Abu Dujanah and others who 
had been in the forefront of the battle had fought their way back through 
the host. They now reached the Prophet's side, but not before a sharp stone 
from the enemy had struck him in the mouth, gashing his lower lip and 
breaking one of his teeth. The blood flowed from his face, but doing what 
he could to staunch it, he reassured ‘All and the others that he was not 
seriously injured, and they returned to the fight, except for Talhah, who 
was too weak from loss of blood and who now fainted. “Look to thy 
cousin,” said the Prophet to Abu Bakr, but Talhah almost immediately 
recovered consciousness, while Sa‘d of Zuhrah and Harith ibn Simmah of 
Khazraj went out instead of him, and together with the new reinforce¬ 
ments they made so great an onslaught against the enemy that for the 
moment their lines receded away from the bodies of the five Helpers who 
had even now sold their lives. The Prophet looked at them and invoked 
blessings upon them, and the one who was not yet dead began with an 
effort to work his way along the ground towards him. He sent two men to 
carry him, and as a pillow for the dying man’s head he put out his foot, 
which he kept motionless until the man died with his cheek resting upon it. 

“Know that Paradise is beneath the shadow of the swords,” 1 the Prophet 
said; and in after-years he would look back to this particular time and 
place as being so wondrously blessed that on one occasion he exclaimed: 
“Would I had been left abandoned with my Companions of the moun¬ 
tain’s foot!” 2 

The enemy gradually began to gain the ground they had lost. In the little 
group round the Prophet the supply of arrows would soon be finished, and 
in any case it seemed that the time for archery was running out. If the 
enemy continued to advance every sword would soon have to be un¬ 
sheathed for a final hand-to-hand conflict with an average of four pagans 
against every believer. Then suddenly a single horseman came in from the 
side and made straight for where the Prophet was standing. “Where is 
Muhammad?” he shouted. “May I not survive if he survive!” It was Ibn 
Qami’ah, a man of one of the outskirt clans of Quraysh, who had already 
made much slaughter among the Muslims. With a quick glance at the 
group his sharp eye recognised his intended victim and urging on his 
horse, he brought down his sword in a blow which he was sure no helmet 
could resist. But Talhah, who was standing next to the Prophet, threw 
himself in the direction of the sword and was somehow able to deflect the 
blow a little, at the expense of losing the use of the fingers of one of his 
hands for the rest of his life. The blade narrowly missed the crown of the 
Prophet’s helmet and glanced off the side of it, grazing his temple, driving 
two of the helmet rings into his cheek, and finally, with its force somewhat 
spent, striking his doubly mailed shoulder. The shock against the side of 
his head momentarily stunned him and he fell to the ground, whereupon 
his assailant withdrew as quickly as he had come. But others closed in to 
attack, and Shammas J of Makhzum stationed himself in front of the 
Prophet and fought like a man inspired - the Prophet described him as a 


B.LII,22. 


2 W. 256. * Seep. 82. 



186 Muhammad 


living shield - until he was cut down, and another man took his place, 
backed by Nusaybah, who had now drawn her sword. 

A voice — perhaps that of Ibn Qami’ah himself - was heard to shout: 
“Muhammad is slain!” The cry was taken up all over the field, interspersed 
with glorifications of al-‘Uzzah and Hubal. The cliffs of Uhud resounded 
and the Muslims who had fled were overcome with self-reproach and 
sorrow, while many of those who were still fighting in the plain lost heart 
and withdrew from the strife as best they might. But there were many 
exceptions, and one of these was Anas the son of Nadr after whom his 
nephew, the Prophet’s servant Anas, was named. It was his sister, the 
daughter of Nadr, who had been told by the Prophet that her son, killed by 
an arrow at Badr, was in Firdaws, the highest Paradise. Anas came upon 
two of his fellows for whom life seemed to have lost its meaning, and who 
could bring themselves neither to continue fighting nor to climb the ascent 
to safety. “Why sit ye here?” he exclaimed. “The Messenger of God hath 
been slain,” they said. “Then what will ye do with life after him?” said 
Anas. “Rise and die, even as he died.” 1 Aiid he set off for where the fight 
was thickest. There he found Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh, who told the Prophet 
afterwards that Anas had called to him: “Paradise! I scent its fragrance 
blowing from the other side of Uhud.” “O Messenger of God,” said Sa‘d, 
“I could not fight as he fought.” Afterwards they found Anas lying dead 
with more than eighty wounds, so disfigured as to be unrecognisable to 
anyone save his sister, who knew him by his fingers. 2 

As to the believers who now sought refuge on the higher ground above 
the plain, withdrawal was made easier for them because most of the enemy 
felt that the battle was now over and they too slackened their efforts. The 
dead had not yet been counted, but it was evident that they had amply 
avenged those who had died at Badr; and now, by killing the man who had 
been the sole cause of all the strife, they had surely put an end to the new 
religion and virtually re-established the old order of things. Yd lal- e Uzzah 
yd la-Hubal! 

The sudden relaxing of effort on the part of Quraysh was nowhere more 
apparent than amongst those who had half surrounded the little group of 
some twenty men who were acting as a bodyguard to the Prophet. It had 
become clear to the Meccans that these were men who would never be 
taken prisoner and who in fighting to the death would certainly deal death 
to others. So their better course, now that their main purpose had been 
achieved, was to live and let live, and to celebrate their victory. 

The Prophet had almost immediately recovered consciousness, and 
when the enemy had withdrawn he rose to his feet and, motioning to his 
Companions to follow him, he led them towards the entrance of a glen 
which seemed to offer the easiest ascent to a point of safety from which 
they could watch over the movement of the enemy. But he was now in great 
pain from his cheek: the metal rings were deeply embedded in the flesh, so 
they halted for a moment and Abu ‘Ubaydah caught one of them and then 
the other between his teeth and drew them out. The wound began to bleed 
again and Malik of Khazraj put his mouth to it and sucked out the blood 

1 W.280. 2 B. LVI, 12. 



The Battle of Uhud 187 

and swallowed it. It was he who had said in Medina: “We have before us 
one of two good things”; and except for Shammas, who appeared to be 
dead, he was the most severely wounded of those present. The Prophet 
said: “Whoso would look on a man whose blood is mingled with my 
blood, let him look on Malik, the son of Sinan.” Abu ‘Ubaydah was 
also included, for in his effort to remove the rings he had pulled out 
two of his own teeth and his mouth was bleeding. The Prophet said to 
them: “Whose blood hath touched my blood, him the fire cannot 
reach.” 1 

As the small party moved up the glen they were seen by some of those 
who had already taken refuge on Uhud, and they came down to meet them. 
Ka‘b ibn Malik was ahead of the others, and he was surprised to see a man 
whose stature and bearing were exactly like those of the Prophet, albeit 
that his gait was slower. Then, as he drew near, Ka‘b saw the incomparable 
and unmistakable brightness of the eyes through the eyeholes of the visor, 
and he turned and shouted to those behind him: “O Muslims, be of good 
cheer! This is the Messenger of God!” The Prophet motioned him to be 
silent, and he did not shout the good news again, but it spread from mouth 
to mouth, and men came hurrying to reassure themselves that it was true. 
So great was the rejoicing that it was as if the defeat had suddenly been 
changed into victory. 

But Ka‘b’s joyful shout was heard by a solitary horseman of Quraysh 
who had halted on the very site they had just vacated. It was Ubayy, the 
brother of Umayyah, who had sworn that from the back of his horse ‘Awd, 
which he was now riding, he would kill the Prophet. Having learned that 
his intended victim was dead, he had no doubt come to look for the body to 
see if there was still life in it; and when he heard the shout of Ka‘b he rode 
up the glen until he was hard on the heels of the Muslims. They turned to 
face him. “O Muhammad,” he called out, “if thou escape, then may not I 
escape!” Some of the Companions closed round the Prophet, and others 
were about to attack Ubayy when the Prophet ordered them to hold off 
their hands; and those who were round him said afterwards that he shook 
himself clear of them as if they had been no more than flies on a camel’s 
back. Then he took a spear from Harith ibn as-Simmah and stepped in 
front of them all. Not daring to move, they looked on in awe at his grim 
and deadly earnestness. As one of them said: “When the Messenger of God 
made a deliberate effort toward some end, there was no earnestness that 
could compare with his.” 2 Ubayy approached with drawn sword, but 
before he could strike a blow the Prophet had thrust him in the neck. He 
bellowed like a bull, then swayed and almost fell from his horse but, 
recovering his balance, he turned and galloped down the slope and did not 
stop until he reached the Meccan camp where his nephew Safwan and 
others of his clan were now assembled. “Muhammad hath slain me,” he 
said in a voice he could not control. They looked at his wound and made 
light of it, but he was convinced that it was mortal, as indeed it soon proved 
to be. “He told me he would kill me,” he said, “and by God if he had spat 
upon me he would have killed me.” Was Muhammad not dead after all, 


1 W.247. 


2 W.251. 



188 Muhammad 


they began to wonder. But Ubayy was clearly beside himself, and in any 
case it was easy to mistake one helmeted man for another. 

When the Prophet and his Companions reached the top of the glen, ‘All 
went to fill his shield with water from a cavity in the rocks. He held it out to 
the Prophet, but the odour of its stagnancy repelled him, and he could not 
bring himself to drink of it despite his thirst, though he used some of it to 
wash the blood from his face. Then, since they were still too easily 
accessible from the plain, he gave the word to move onwards to higher 
ground, and he tried to raise himself onto a ledge of rock from which 
further ascent could be made. But he was too weak for the effort, so Talhah 
crouched below the ledge with great violence to his wounds, and taking the 
Prophet on his back he raised him to the necessary height. The Prophet said 
of him that day: “He that would behold a martyr walking the face of the 
earth, let him look on Talhah the son of ‘Ubayd Allah.” 1 

By the time they had found a place which could serve as a temporary 
camp the sun had reached its zenith and they prayed the noon prayer. The 
Prophet, who led it, remained seated throughout, and everyone followed 
his example. Then they lay down to rest and many of them slept a deep and 
refreshing sleep, while a relay of watchmen kept watch from a point of 
vantage overlooking the plain. 


1 I.H. 571. 



LIII 


Revenge 


Q URAYSH were now busy about their dead and their wounded. 
The losses had not been great: there were only twenty-two killed 
out of three thousand. Then they counted the losses of the enemy 
and found about sixty-five dead, many of whom they did not 
know. Only three were Emigrants: Hamzah of Hashim, Mus‘ab of ‘Abd 
ad-Dar, and ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh. A few other bodies at some distance 
from the centre of the field, wounded as well as dead, escaped their notice. 
Amongst these was Shammas, still alive but unable to move. In vain they 
searched for the body of Muhammad, and while they were doing so 
WahshI went back to the body of Hamzah, ripped open his belly, cut out 
his liver and brought it to Hind. “What shall be mine for slaying the slayer 
of thy father?” he said. “All my share of the spoils,” was her answer. “This 
is Hamzah’s liver,” he said, and she took it from him and bit away a piece 
of it, chewed it, swallowed a morsel in fulfilment of her vow and spat out 
the rest. “Show me where he is,” she said, and when they reached the body 
she cut off his nose and ears and other parts of his flesh. Then she took off 
her necklaces and pendants and anklets and gave them to WahshI, telling 
the women who were with her to mutilate others of the dead. They all 
made for themselves ornaments of vengeance with what they cut from the 
bodies of the Muslims, and Hind mounted upon a rock and uttered a chant 
of triumph. One or two men of Quraysh also sought to slake their thirst for 
revenge by mutilating the dead, but their Bedouin allies were outraged. 
Abu Sufyan was striking the side of Hamzah’s mouth with the point of his 
spear and saying “Taste that, thou rebel” when Hulays passed by, the 
leader of one of the clans of Kinanah. In a loud voice, so that Abu Sufyan 
could hear, he said: “O sons of Kinanah, can this be the lord of Quraysh 
who is doing what ye see with the body of his dead cousin?” “Confound 
thee,” said Abu Sufyan, “tell not of it. A slip it was, no more.” 1 

Meantime Abu ‘Amir came upon the body of his son Hanzalah, and 
grievously lamented over him saying: “Did I not warn thee against this 
man?” - he meant the Prophet. “But thou wast a dutiful son unto thy 
father, noble of character in thy life, and in thy death thou liest with the 
flower of thy companions. If God requite with good this slain one” - he 
pointed to Hamzah - “or any of the followers of Muhammad, may he 
requite thee with good!” 2 Then he looked sternly at Hind and the other 
women and said in a loud voice: “O Quraysh, let not Hanzalah be 


1 I.I.582. 


2 W.274. 



190 Muhammad. 

mutilated, what though he was mine adversary and yours!” And they 
respected his wishes. 

It was now presumed that Ubayy had not been mistaken, and that the 
Prophet was with his army somewhere on the high ground above the plain. 
But the battle was over: there could be no question of attacking the 
mountain, and the slaves had already been told to strike camp. So when 
they had buried their own dead and taken their fill of revenge on the enemy 
dead, they loaded the armour and whatever else they had stripped from 
them onto their camels, and prepared to set off. But before they did so Abu 
Sufyan mounted his chestnut mare and rode to the foot of the mountain, to 
the point nearest where the Prophet and his Companions had been 
stationed, and shouted at the top of his voice: “War goeth by turns, and 
this is a day for a day. Exalt thyself, O Hubal! Make prevail thy religion!” 
The Prophet told ‘Umar to go and answer him, saying: “God is All- 
Highest, Supreme in Majesty. We are not equal: our slain are in Paradise, 
yours are in the Fire.” So ‘Umar went to the edge of the precipice below 
which Abu Sufyan was standing and answered him as the Prophet had 
said, whereupon Abu Sufyan called up to ‘Umar, having recognised his 
voice: “I adjure thee, ‘Umar, by God, have we slain Muhammad?” “No, 
by God,” said ‘Umar, “but he is even now listening to what thou sayest.” 
“I take thy word for it as truer than the word of Ibn Qami’ah,” said Abu 
Sufyan. He turned to go, but turning back once more he added: “Some of 
your dead have been mutilated. By God, I take no pleasure therein, neither 
am I wroth. I forbade it not, nor did I command it.” Then he said: “Badr be 
your meeting-place with us next year!” Hearing this, the Prophet sent 
another of his Companions to the edge of the cliff, to shout his response: 
“That is a binding tryst between us.” 1 

Abu Sufyan rode to where his army was waiting for him at the further 
side of the plain, and they set off towards the south. It was too far for 
‘Umar to discern clearly their formation, so the Prophet sent Sa‘d of 
Zuhrah down to the plain to follow them and see what they were about. “If 
they are leading their horses”, he said, “and riding their camels, they are 
for Mecca; but if they are riding their horses and leading their camels, they 
are for Medina; and by Him in whose hand is my soul, if that is their aim, I 
will overtake them and fight them.” Sa‘d went down to the gully where the 
Prophet’s stallion Sakb had been tethered ever since their arrival in Uhud, 
and having ridden after the Meccans until he had a clear sight of them, he 
then hastened back with the good tidings that their horsemen were on 
camelback leading their horses beside them. As one of them said in 
after-years, namely ‘Amr 2 , who had taken part with Khalid in the decisive 
cavalry charge: “We had heard that Ibn Ubayy had returned to Medina 
with a third of the army, and that some men of Aws and Khazraj had 
stayed in the city. Nor could we be certain that those who had retreated 
would not return to the attack; and many of us were wounded, and nearly 
all our horses had been pierced by arrows, so we went on our way.” 3 


1 I.I.583. 


2 Seep. 81. 


3 W. 299. 



LIV 

The Burial of the 
Martyrs 

T HE Prophet now led his Companions down into the plain. Harith 
ibn as-Simmah had been sent on ahead to look for the body of 
Hamzah, but when he found him he was so appalled at the sight and 
at having to tell the Prophet that he did not at once return, and ‘All was sent 
after him. He found Harith standing aghast by the mutilated body, and 
they both returned together. When the Prophet saw what had been done he 
said: “Never yet have I felt more anger than now I feel; and when next God 
giveth me a victory over Quraysh I will mutilate thirty of their dead.” 1 But 
soon after this there came the Revelation: If ye inflict punishment, then 
inflict only so much as ye have suffered; but if ye endure patiently, that is 
better for the patient . 2 And not only did he not fulfil his threat, but he 
expressly forbade mutilation after every battle. Moreover, as regards the 
fighting itself, he told them to respect the human face as being the most 
godlike part of the body: “When one of you striketh a blow, let him avoid 
striking the face ... for God created Adam in His image.” 3 

‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh had been struck down not far from Hamzah, and 
his body also had been mutilated. But when the Prophet turned away from 
them to look for others of the dead, a very different sight met his eyes. One 
of the nearest bodies to those of his two kinsmen was the body of 
Hanzalah. Neither man nor woman of Quraysh had ventured to touch 
him, and he lay there even as the Angels had laid him, with his hair still wet 
with water upon the noon-dry earth. None passed him by who did not give 
thanks, for in his beauty and his peace he was as a sign from Heaven, to 
inform the bereaved of the present state of their martyred kinsmen. 

Not far away were the bodies of Khaythamah and Ibn ad-Dahdahah - 
Khaythamah whose martyred son had appeared to him in his sleep, 
bidding him hasten to join him, and Thabit ibn ad-Dahdahah who had 
made a gift of the palm-tree to the orphan. When the Prophet saw Thabit, 
he said: “Palms with low-hanging heavy-laden clusters, what a multitude 
of these hath the son of Dahdahah in Paradise!” 4 
When one of the clans of Aws were looking for their dead, they found to 


1 I.I.584. 2 XVI, 126. 3 A.H. 1 ,251; M. XLV, 32. 4 W. 505. 



192 Muhammad 

their surprise a man of theirs named Usayrim whom only the day before 
they had rebuked for not being a Muslim. Whenever they spoke to him 
about Islam he used to say: “If I knew it to be true, all that ye say, I would 
not hesitate.” Yet there he was on the field of battle, mortally wounded but 
not yet dead. “What brought thee here?” they said. “Was it care for thy 
people, or was it for the sake of Islam?” “It was for Islam,” he said. 
“Suddenly I believed in God and in his Messenger and I entered Islam. 
Then I took my sword and came out early this morning to be with the 
Messenger of God; and I fought until I was struck the blow that felled me 
here.” He could say no more and they stayed with him until he died. Then 
they told the Prophet, who assured them that he was of the people of 
Paradise, and in after years Usayrim came to be known as the man who 
entered Paradise without ever having prayed one of the five daily prayers. 

Amongst the dead they found a stranger, or so it seemed at first, until one 
of them recognised him as Mukhayriq, a learned rabbi of the Jewish clan of 
Tha‘labah. Early that morning, as they were afterwards informed, he had 
summoned his people to keep their pact with the Prophet and to join him in 
fighting the idolaters, and when they protested that it was the Sabbath he 
said: “Ye keep not the Sabbath truly.” Then he adjured them to witness 
that Muhammad was his sole heir. “If I am slain this day,” he said, “my 
possessions are for Muhammad, to use even as God shall show him.” Then 
taking his sword and other weapons he set out for Uhud, where he fought 
till he was killed. Thereafter a large portion of the alms that were 
distributed in Medina came from the rich palm groves that the Prophet 
inherited from Mukhayriq, “the best of the Jews”, as he called him. 

As soon as it was clear that the Meccans intended to return the way they 
had come, thus giving Medina a wide berth, women began to set out from 
the city to tend the wounded and to see for themselves how true or how 
false were the various rumours that ever since noon had been coming to 
their ears. Among the first women to come were Safiyyah and ‘A’ishah and 
Umm Ayman. The Prophet was distressed to see Safiyyah approaching, 
and he called to Zubayr: “Help me with thy mother, and let Hamzah’s 
grave be dug forthwith. Go thou to meet her and take her back, lest she see 
what hath befallen her brother.” So Zubayr went to her and said: 
“Mother, the Messenger of God biddeth thee return.” But Safiyyah had 
already learned the news at the edge of the field. “Why should I return?” 
she said. “I have heard that my brother hath been mutilated, but it was for 
the sake of God, and that which is for His sake do we fully accept. I 
promise that I shall be calm and patient if God will.” Zubayr returned to 
the Prophet, who told him to let her have her way. So she came and looked 
at her brother and prayed over him and recited the Verse of Return: Verily 
we are for God, and verily unto Him are we returning ; and they all took 
comfort in remembering the context of this verse, from a Revelation which 
had been received after Badr: O ye who believe, seek help of God in 
steadfastness and in prayer. Verily God is with the steadfast. And say not 
“dead” of those who have been slain in God's path, for they are living, only 
ye perceive not. And We shall surely try you with something of fear and of 
hunger, and loss of goods and lives and harvesting. But give good tidings 
unto the steadfast, who say when a blow befalleth them: Verily we are for 



The Burial of the Martyrs 193 

God, and verily unto Him are we returning. On these are blessings from 
their Lord and mercy; and these are the rightly guided . 1 

Safiyyah then stood and prayed over the body of her sister Umaymah’s 
son, ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, and she was soon joined by Fatimah. The two 
women wept over their dead, and it was a relief to the Prophet to weep with 
them. Fatimah t ien dressed her father’s wounds. Their cousin Hamnah, 
‘Abd Allah’s sister, was now seen approaching, and their sorrow was 
increased by having to tell her of the death of her husband Mus‘ab, as well 
as of the deaths of her brother and her uncle. When the battle was already 
well advanced the Prophet had seen Mus‘ab, as he thought, still bearing 
the banner, and had called out to him. But the man had answered: “I am 
not Mus‘ab”, and the Prophet had known that it was an Angel and that 
Mus‘ab must have been killed or disabled. He now stood by the dead 
man’s body and recited the verse: Of the believers are men who are true to 
their covenant with God. Some of them have made good their vow by 
death, and some are waiting, and they waver not nor change . 1 

He ordered that all the dead should be brought and laid near the body of 
Hamzah, and that graves should be dug. Hamzah was wrapped in a 
mantle, and the Prophet prayed over him the funeral prayer, after which he 
prayed over each one of the dead, seventy-two prayers in all. As soon as a 
grave was ready, two or three were buried in it. Hamzah and his nephew 
‘Abd Allah were laid together in one grave. The Prophet himself presided 
over every burial. “Look for ‘Amr the son of Jamuh and ‘Abd Allah the son 
of Amr,” he said. “In this world they were friends inseparable, so lay them 
in one grave.” But Hind, wife of ‘Amr and sister of ‘Abd Allah - the father 
of Jabir — had already brought the two bodies together, and with them the 
body of her son Khallad. She had tried to take them to Medina, but when 
her camel had reached the edge of the plain he had refused to go any further 
-by God’s command, as the Prophet told her - and she had been obliged to 
bring the bodies once more to the battlefield. So the three were laid in one 
grave, and the Prophet stood beside them until they were buried. “O 
Hind,” he said, “they are all of them together in Paradise, ‘Amr and thy son 
Khallad and thy brother ‘Abd Allah.” “O Messenger of God,” said Hind, 
“pray God that He place me with them.” 

Unlike most of the dead, the man of Muzaynah who had fought so 
valiantly had none of his people present, for his nephew had also fought to 
the death. So the Prophet went to him and stood beside him saying: “May 
God be pleased with thee, even as I am pleased with thee.” 3 Tliey had 
wrapped his body in a green-striped cloak he was wearing, and when he 
was laid in the grave the Prophet drew it up to cover his face and his feet 
were uncovered. So he told them to gather some rue from the plain and 
to spread it over his feet. And this he bade them do with many of the 
dead, that both their faces and their feet might be covered before the earth 
was piled up over them. 

When the last grave had been filled the Prophet called for his horse and 
mounted it, and they set off down the gorge, the way they had come at 
dawn. When they reached the beginning of the lava tract he told them to 


1 H, 153-7. 


2 XXXIII, 23. 


W. 277- 



194 Muhammad 

stand in line to give praise and thanksgiving to God, and the men formed 
two lines facing Mecca, with the women behind them, fourteen women in 
all. Then he glorified God, and prayed, saying: “O God, I ask of thee Thy 
blessing and Thy mercy and Thy grace and Thine indulgence. O God, I ask 
of Thee the eternal bliss that fadeth not nor passeth away. O God, I ask of 
Thee safety on the day of fear, and plenty on the day of destitution.” 1 

1 W.315. 



LV 

After Uhud 

T HE sun was setting as they approached the city and they prayed the 
sunset prayer as soon as they reached the Mosque. The Prophet then 
lay down to rest and fell into so deep a sleep that he did not hear 
Bilal’s call to the night prayer, but prayed it alone in his house when he 
woke. The two Sa‘ds of the Helpers and other leaders of Aws and Khazraj 
spent the night at the door of the Mosque and took it in turns to stand on 
guard, for there was still always the possibility that Quraysh might return; 
and early the next morning, when the prayer had been prayed, the Prophet 
told Bilal to announce to them and to others that the enemy must be 
pursued. “But none shall go out with us,” he said, “save those who were 
present at the battle of yesterday.” 

When the chiefs returned to their various clans they found most of the 
men tending their wounds or having them tended by their women, for very 
few of the fighters at Uhud were unscathed, and many of them were 
severely injured. But on hearing the Prophet’s summons they bandaged 
their wounds as best they could and made themselves ready to set out once 
again, all except Malik and Shammas. Malik, now in an extremity of 
weakness, was being tended by his family. Shammas, none of whose 
nearest of kin were in Medina, had been carried unconscious from the 
battlefield to ‘A’ishah’s apartment. But Umm Salamah claimed the right 
to tend her fellow clansman, so he was put in her charge. Since his death 
seemed imminent, the Prophet left instructions that he should not be 
buried in Medina but with his fellow martyrs at Uhud. 

The Prophet himself was one of the first to be ready, although he could 
now scarcely move his right shoulder, which had taken the shock of the 
blow intended for his head. When Talhah came to inquire about the time 
of departure, he was astonished to see him on horseback at the door of the 
mosque, with his visor down and nothing visible of him but his eyes. 
Disabled though he was, Talhah ran to his house to make himself ready. 

Amongst those of the Bani Salimah who set out there were forty 
wounded men, some of them with more than ten gashes or thrusts or arrow 
wounds; and when they stood in line for the Prophet at the appointed place 
and he saw what plight they were in he rejoiced at the power of their souls 
over their bodies, and prayed: “O God, have mercy upon the Bani 
Salimah!” Of all the clans, only one man went out who had not fought at 
Uhud, and that was Jabir. On hearing the summons that morning he had 
gone to the Prophet and said: “O Messenger of God, I was eager to be 
present at the battle, but my father left me in charge of my seven young 



196 Muhammad 

sisters. And thus it was that for martyrdom God preferred him to me, 
though I had hoped for it. So let me go with thee now, O Messenger of 
God.” And the Prophet gave him permission to march out with the others. 

They made their first halt about eight miles from Medina. The enemy 
were by that time encamped at Rawha’, which was not far ahead. On 
hearing this the Prophet ordered his men to spread themselves over a wide 
area of ground and to gather as much wood as they could find, piling it up 
each man for himself in a separate pile. By sunset they had prepared over 
five hundred beacons, and when night had fallen every man set fire to his. 
The flames were seen far and wide, as if a great army were encamped there. 
This impression was confirmed for Abu Sufyan by a man of Khuza‘ah who, 
though still an idolater, was friendly to the Muslims and who told him with 
deliberate untruth that the whole city of Medina had come out in pursuit of 
them, including all those who had stayed behind from Uhud and all their 
confederates. “By God,” he said, “ye will not have moved off before ye 
have seen the forelocks of their cavalry.” Some of Quraysh had wanted to 
return and attack Medina, but they now unanimously decided to press on 
with all speed for Mecca. None the less Abu Sufyan sent back a parting 
message for the Prophet by some riders who were on their way to Medina 
for provisions. “Tell Muhammad from me,” he said, “that we are resolved 
to come against him and his companions and to root them out, those that 
yet remain, from the face of the earth. Tell him this, and when ye reach 
‘Ukaz on your return I will load your camel with raisins.” When they 
delivered the message to the Prophet, he answered in the words of a recent 
Revelation: God is our sufficiency , and supremely to be trusted is He . 1 

He and his Companions spent the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday at 
their camp, lighting beacons every night, and those were days of much- 
needed rest and plenty. There had been an excellent fruit harvest the 
previous summer, and Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah had loaded thirty camels with 
dates, and others had been brought to be sacrificed. On the Thursday they 
returned to Medina. 

Shammas had died soon after they had set out and he had been buried at 
Uhud. Malik had also died during their absence, but his family had buried 
him in Medina. The Prophet now gave orders that his body should be 
taken to Uhud and buried there. 

On his return from fighting at Uhud, ‘Abd Allah the son of Ibn Ubayy 
had spent part of the night after the battle cauterising a wound, while his 
father enlarged on the folly of having gone out to attack the enemy. “By 
God, it was as if I had seen it all,” he said. “What God did for His 
Messenger and the Muslims was good,” said his son. But Ibn Ubayy was 
not to open to argument. “If the slain had been with us, they would not have 
been slain,” he insisted. Nor had he been silent during his son’s recent 
absence from Medina with the rest of the fighters, neither had the Jews 
refrained from affirming with more conviction than ever: “Muhammad is 
nothing but a seeker of kingship. No Prophet hath ever met with such 
reverse. He was smitten in his own body, as well as in his companions.” 

Much of what had been said by both Jews and hypocrites was repeated 


1 111,173. 



After Uhud 197 

to ‘Umar on his return from the expedition of the beacons. He immediately 
went to the Prophet and asked his permission to kill those who were 
responsible, but the Prophet forbade him to do so. “God will make prevail 
His religion,” he said, “and He will empower His prophet.” Then he said: 
“O son of Khattab, verily Quraysh shall not gain from us the like of that 
day again, and we shall greet the Corner.” 1 - he meant that they would 
enter Mecca and kiss Black Stone. 

Although ‘Umar’s hands were tied, Ibn Ubayy did not escape altogether 
unscathed. He had taken to occupying a place of honour in the Mosque at 
the Friday prayer, and no one had thought to deny him this on account of 
his standing in Medina. When the Prophet mounted the pulpit to preach, 
he would rise and say: “O people, this is the Messenger of God. May God 
through him be bountiful to you and give you strength! Help ye him 
therefore and honour him and hear him and obey him.” Then he would be 
seated again. But when he rose to speak as usual on the day after their 
return, the first Friday since Uhud, those of the Helpers who were nearest 
him seized him on both sides, saying “Sit, thou enemy of God. Thou art not 
worthy to hold forth, having done what thou didst,” whereupon he left the 
congregation, threading his way through the densely seated men. One of 
the Helpers who met him at the door of the Mosque said to him: “Return 
and let the Messenger of God ask forgiveness for thee.” But he said: “By 
God, I want not that he should ask forgiveness for me.” 

In the days which followed Uhud, the Prophet received many Revela¬ 
tions concerning the battle, and it appeared from them that a considerable 
portion of two of the clans had seriously thought of deserting the army 
shortly before the fight was joined, and that God had strengthened them 
and given them resolution. One of the two were the Bani Salimah of 
Khazraj, whose bearing had so pleased the Prophet as they were setting out 
in pursuit of the enemy. When they and the Bani Harithah of Aws heard 
the Revelation 2 they said that they were the ones referred to, but that they 
did not regret their moment of weakness because it had brought them 
strength from God, which was better than their own strength. Other verses 
were revealed with reference to those survivors of the sudden cavalry 
charge who had fled in panic to the mountain, and in particular to those of 
them who had previously urged the Prophet to go out to fight, so that they 
might attain to martyrdom. Deemed ye that ye would enter Paradise ere 
God knoweth those of you that truly strive and ere He knoweth the 
steadfastf Ye wished for death until ye met it; now ye have seen it face to 
face ! 3 

But the Revelation made it none the less clear that those who had 
disobeyed orders had expiated their faults on the battlefield and had been 
forgiven. Part of their expiation had been their great sorrow at hearing that 
the Prophet was dead. 4 It was also affirmed, with reference to the visible 
ruins that remained from previous civilisations, that the established order 
of things in Arabia would pass away, and that Islam would triumph: Ways 
of life have passed away before you. Travel in the land and see what was 
the end of those who belied God’s messengers. This is a clear affirmation 

1 W. 317. J III, iiz. 1 111,142-3. 4 111,152-5. 



198 Muhammad 

for mankind, and a guidance and an exhortation for the pious. Falter not 
nor grieve , for ye shall overcome them if ye are true believers . 1 

There was also another reference to the future, of a different kind: 
Muhammad is but a messenger , and messengers have passed away before 
him. If he die or be slain, will ye then turn upon your heels? Whoso turneth 
upon his heels will thereby do no hurt unto God; and God will reward the 
thankful . 1 


Ill, 137-9- 


2 III,i 44 - 



LVI 


Victims of Revenge 


F OR two months and more there was nothing to disturb the peace. 
Then came news that the Bani Asad ibn Khuzaymah were planning a 
raid on the oasis. Notwithstanding the Islam of the Jahsh family and 
other Asadites who had previously lived in Mecca, the main body of this 
widespread and powerful tribe of Najd were still close allies of Quraysh, 
who had now encouraged them to take advantage of the disabling effect of 
Uhud. It was therefore necessary to demonstrate to them and to all Arabia 
that the Muslims derived strength from Uhud rather than weakness. So the 
Prophet sent out a body of a hundred and fifty well armed and well 
mounted men into their territory to the north of the central desert under 
the command of his cousin Abu Salamah with instructions to do all in his 
power to take their camp by surprise. This they succeeded in doing, but 
after a brief encounter, with little bloodshed on either side, the Bedouin 
withdrew and scattered in all directions, while the Muslims returned to 
Medina after eleven days with a large herd of camels and three herdsmen. 
The expedition had served its main purpose, which was to affirm the 
undiminished power of Islam. 

About the same time news came of the danger of another projected raid 
from further south; but in this instance the Prophet divined that the 
hostility against Islam was all concentrated in one remarkably evil man, 
the chief of the Lihyanite branch of Hudhayl. If they could be rid of him, 
the danger from that quarter would become negligible; so he sent ‘Abd 
Allah ibn Unays, a man of Khazraj, with instructions to kill him. “O 
Messenger of God,” said ‘Abd Allah, “describe him to me that I may know 
him.” “When thou seest him,” said the Prophet, “he will remind thee of 
Satan. The certain sign for thee that he is indeed the man will be that when 
thou seest him thou wilt shudder at him.” It was as he had said; and, 
having killed the man, ‘Abd Allah escaped with his life. 

All idea of the projected raid against Medina was now abandoned, but 
it was no doubt in revenge for this death of one of their chiefs that in the 
following month some men of Hudhayl attacked six Muslims who were on 
their way to give religious instruction to two of the smaller neighbouring 
tribes. The encounter took place in Rajl‘, a watering place not far from 
Mecca. Three of the Prophet’s men died fighting, and three were taken 
captive, one of whom was subsequently killed when he tried to escape. 
Amongst those who died fighting was ‘ Asim of Aws who had killed two of 
the standard bearers of Quraysh at Uhud. Their mother had sworn to 
drink wine out of his skull, and the men of Hudhayl were bent on selling 



200 Muhammad 


her his head for that purpose. But ‘Asim’s body was protected from them 
by a swarm of bees until nightfall, and during the night it was swept away 
by a flood, so that the mother’s vow was never fulfilled. As for the two 
captives, Khubayb of Aws and Zayd of Khazraj, they were sold to 
Quraysh, who were still glad of any means of avenging those slain at Badr. 
Khubayb was bought by a confederate of the Bani Nawfal and presented to 
a member of that clan so that he might kill him in revenge for his father. 
Safwan bought Zayd for a similar purpose, and the two men were 
imprisoned in Mecca until the sacred months were past. 

After the sighting of the new moon of Safar they were taken outside the 
hallowed precinct to Tan‘Im. There they met for the first time since their 
imprisonment, and they embraced, and exhorted each other to patience. 
Then the Bani Nawfal and others who were with them took Khubayb a 
short distance away, and when he saw that they were about to bind him to 
a stake he asked to be allowed to pray first, and he prayed two cycles of the 
ritual prayer. It is said that he was the inaugurator of the wont that a 
condemned man shoulcl pray thus before his death. Then they bound him 
to the stake saying: “Revert from Islam, and we will let thee go free.” “I 
would not revert from Islam,” he said, “if by so doing I could have all that 
is on earth.” “Dost thou not wish that Muhammad were in thy place,” 
they said, “and that thou wert sitting in thy home?” “I would not that 
Muhammad should be pierced by a single thorn that I might thereby be 
sitting in my home,” he answered. “Revert, O Khubayb,” they persisted, 
“for if thou dost not we will surely slay thee.” “My being slain for God is 
but a trifle, if I die in Him,” he said, and then: “As to your turning my face 
away from the direction of holiness” - he meant from Mecca, for they had 
turned him another way — “verily God saith: Wheresoever ye turn, there is 
the Face of God.” 1 Then he said: “O God, no man is here who will take 
Thy Messenger my greeting of Peace, so take him Thou my greeting of 
Peace.” Now the Prophet was sitting with Zayd and others of his Compan¬ 
ions in Medina, and there came over him a state even as when the 
Revelation descended upon him, and they heard him say: “And on him be 
Peace and the Mercy of God!” Then he said: “This is Gabriel, who greeteth 
me with Peace from Khubayb.” 2 

Quraysh had with them about forty boys whose fathers had been killed 
at Badr, and they gave each boy a spear and said: “This is he who slew your 
fathers.” They speared him but did not kill him, so a man put his hand over 
the hand of one of the boys and gave Khubayb a mortal wound, and 
another did the same, yet he remained alive for an hour, continually 
repeating the two testifications of Islam: There is no god but God, and 
Muhammad is the messenger of God. 

His fellow captive Zayd was then put to death, and he also prayed two 
cycles of prayer before he was tied to the stake, and gave similar answers to 
the same questions. Akhnas ibn ash-Shariq, the confederate of Zuhrah, 
who had gone out with the others to Tan‘Im, was impelled to remark: “No 
father so loveth his son as the companions of Muhammad love Mu¬ 
hammad.” 

1 11,115. 2 W.360. 



Victims of Revenge 201 

When ‘Ubaydah had died after his single combat with ‘Utbah at the 
beginning of the battle of Badr, he had left a widow who was very much 
younger than himself, Zaynab, the daughter of Khuzaymah of the Bedouin 
tribe of ‘Amir. She was of a very generous nature, and already before the 
days of Islam she had been known as “the mother of the poor”. A year after 
being widowed she was still unmarried, and when the Prophet asked her to 
marry him she gladly accepted. A fourth apartment was made for her in his 
house adjoining the Mosque, and it was doubtless in connection with this 
new alliance that the Prophet now received a visit from Abu Bara’, the 
ageing chief of Zaynab’s tribe. When Islam was put before him, the old 
man made it clear that he was not averse to it. He did not however embrace 
it then, but asked that some Muslims should be sent to instruct his whole 
tribe. The Prophet said that he was afraid they would be attacked by other 
tribes. The Bani ‘Amir were a branch of Hawazin, and their territory lay to 
the south of Sulaym and other tribes of Ghatafan, against whom the oasis 
of Yathrib had to be continually on its guard. But Abu Bara’ promised that 
no one would violate the protection which, as chief of ‘Amir, he would give 
them, so the Prophet chose forty of his Companions who were eminently 
representative of Islam both in piety and knowledge, and he placed in 
command of them a man of Khazraj, Mundhir ibn ‘Amr. One of them was 
‘Amir ibn Fuhayrah, the freedman whom Abu Bakr had chosen to 
accompany the Prophet and himself on the Hijrah. 

It was not known in Medina that Abu Bara’ ’s leadership was disputed 
within the tribe, and his nephew, who aspired to be chief in his place, killed 
one of the Companions who had been sent on ahead with a letter from the 
Prophet, and called upon his tribe to slaughter the others. When the tribe 
proved to be almost unanimous in upholding Abu Bara’ ’s protection, the 
frustrated nephew sent a message of instigation to two clans of Sulaym 
who had recently been involved in hostilities with Medina. They im¬ 
mediately sent out a detachment of horse and massacred the whole 
delegation of unsuspecting Muslims in their camp by the well of Ma‘unah, 
except for two men who had gone to pasture the camels. One of these two 
was Harith ibn as-Simmah, who had fought so valiantly at Uhud. The 
other was ‘Amr, of the Damrah clan of Kinanah. As they returned from 
pasturing, they were dismayed to see vultures in great numbers circling low 
above their camp, as over a battlefield when the fighting has been finished; 
and they found their companions lying dead in their own blood, with the 
horsemen of Sulaym standing near them, absorbed in so earnest a discus¬ 
sion amongst themselves that they did not appear to notice the newcomers. 
‘Amr was for escaping to Medina with the news, but Harith said “I am not 
one to hold back from fighting on a field where Mundhir hath been slain,” 
and he threw himself on the enemy, killing two of them before he and ‘Amr 
were overpowered and taken captive. They were strangely unwilling to kill 
either of them, even Harith, although two of their men had just died at his 
hands, and they asked him what they should do with him. He said he only 
wanted to be taken to where Mundhir’s body lay and to be given weapons 
and set free to fight them all. They granted his request, and he killed 
another two men before he was finally killed himself. ‘Amr they set free, 
and they asked him to tell them the names of all his dead companions. He 



zoz Muhammad 


went with them to each one, and told them his name and lineage. Then they 
asked him if any of them were missing. “I cannot find a freedman of Abu 
Bakr,” he said, “named ‘Amir ibn Fuhayrah.” “What was his position 
amongst you?” they asked. “He was one of the best of us,” said ‘Amr, “one 
of our Prophet’s first Companions.” “Shall I tell thee what befell him?” 
said his questioner. Then they called to one of their number, Jabbar, who 
had himself killed ‘Amir, and Jabbar recounted how he had come upon 
him from behind and thrust him between the shoulders with his spear. The 
point came out from ‘Amir’s chest, and with his last breath the words “I 
have triumphed, by God” were ejaculated from his lips. “What could that 
mean?” thought Jabbar, feeling that he himself had more right to claim a 
triumph. In amazement he drew out his spear, to be still more amazed 
when unseen hands carried the body high up into the air until it was lost to 
sight. When it was explained to Jabbar that the “triumph” meant Paradise, 
he entered Islam. The Prophet said, when he heard of the event, that the 
Angels had taken ‘Amir to ‘Illiyyun, 1 which is one of the supreme 
Paradises. 2 

The men of Sulaym returned to their tribe, where the story of what had 
befallen was repeated again and again, and this was the beginning of their 
conversion. As to the liberated survivor, ‘Amr, they told him that the 
massacre had been instigated by the Bani ‘Amir; and on his way back to 
Medina he killed two men of that tribe, thinking to avenge his dead 
companions. But both men were in fact entirely innocent, loyal to Abu 
Bara’ and recognising his protection of the believers, so the Prophet 
insisted that blood-wite should be paid for them to their nearest of kin. 


1 W.349. 


2 K. LXXXIII, 18-19. 



LVII 

Bani Nadir 

T HE Jewish tribe of Nadir had long been confederates of the Bani 
‘Amir, and the Prophet decided to ask them to help him pay the 
blood-wite. So he went to them with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar and 
others of his Companions and laid the matter before them. They agreed to 
do what he requested, and invited them to stay until a meal could be 
prepared for them. The Prophet accepted their invitation, and some of the 
Jews withdrew, amongs: them one of their chiefs, Huyay, ostensibly to 
give instructions about the entertainment of their guests. While they were 
sitting there, in front of one of the fortresses, Gabriel came to the Prophet, 
unseen by any save him, and told him that the Jews were planning to kill 
him and that he must return to Medina at once. So he rose and left the 
company without a word, and everyone assumed that he would quickly 
rejoin them. But when some time had passed and he had not returned Abu 
Bakr suggested to the other Companions that they also should go, so they 
took their leave of the Jews and went to the Prophet’s house. He explained 
to them what had happened and then he sent Muhammad ibn Maslamah 
to the Bani Nadir, telling him what to say to them. He went with all speed 
to their fortresses and some of their leaders came out to meet him. “The 
Messenger of God,” he told them, “hath sent me to you, and he saith: ‘By 
your purposing to slay me, ye have broken the pact I made with you.’” 
Then, having recounted to them the exact details of their plot, as the 
Prophet had bidden him do, he delivered the gist of his message: “I give you 
ten days to depart from my country,” saith the Prophet. “Whosoever of 
you is seen after that, his head shall be cut off.” “O son of Maslamah,” 
they said, “we never thought that a man of Aws would bring us such a 
message.” “Hearts have changed,” he replied. 

Most of them had already started preparations to leave, but Ibn Ubayy 
sent word urging them to remain and promising his support, and Huyay, 
not without difficulty, persuaded them to stand firm, for he felt sure that 
their Bedouin allies would not fail them in this crisis, let alone their 
powerful home allies, the Jews of Bani Qurayzah; and having dispatched 
urgent appeals for help to all of these, he sent his brother to the Prophet 
with the message: “We shall not leave our dwellings and our possessions, 
so do what thou wilt.” “Alldhu Akbar ,” said the Prophet, “God is most 
great,” and his Companions who were sitting with him echoed his 
magnification. “The Jews have declared war,” he informed them. Im¬ 
mediately he mustered an army and placing the banner in the hands of ‘All 
he set off for the settlements of Nadir, a little to the south of the city. They 



Z04 Muhammad 

prayed the afternoon prayer in a spacious courtyard which the Jews had 
now vacated since it was outside their defences. After the prayer the 
Prophet led his troops towards the fortresses. 

The ramparts were manned by archers and slingers^ who had also rocks 
at their disposal in case the walls came to be attacked. The two sides kept 
up an exchange of arrows and stones until dark. The Jews had been 
astonished by the speed of their attackers; but the next day - so they 
thought - help was bound to come from Qurayzah and Ibn Ubayy; then, in 
two days or three, their allies of Ghatafan would be with them. Meantime 
the Muslim army was being increased by a continual stream of men from 
Medina who had been unable for some reason or another to set out with 
the Prophet. By the time of the night prayer the greatly increased army was 
large enough to surround the enemy on all sides. The Prophet prayed with 
them, and then returned with ten of his Companions to Medina, leaving 
‘All in charge of the camp. They chanted a litany of magnification the 
whole night long, until it was time for the dawn prayer. The Prophet 
rejoined them in the course of the morning. 

The days passed and the Bani Nadir began to despair of the help which 
many of them had thought to be certain. The Bani Qurayzah refused to 
break their pact with the Prophet, the Bani Ghatafan maintained an 
enigmatic silence, and again Ibn Ubayy was forced to admit that he could 
do nothing. As the hopes of the besieged men dwindled, the mutual 
animosity amongst them increased. The tribe had long been rent with ill 
feeling and bitterness; and now that they were completely cut off from the 
outer world, with no sign of help from any direction, the situation was felt 
to be intolerable. It became altogether so when, after ten days or more, the 
Prophet gave orders to cut down some of the palm-trees which were in 
sight of the walls. This was a sacrifice, for he knew that the territory was 
virtually his own; but it was done by Divine permission, 1 which could be 
taken as a command, and it had the immediate effect of demolishing the 
enemy’s resistance. They gloried in their palms, which were one of their 
chief sources of revenue; and if they were compelled to leave their land 
now they would still think of it as theirs, for they had reason to hope that in 
the near future they would have the opportunity of regaining it. Quraysh 
had promised to eradicate Islam from the oasis. But if the palms were 
destroyed it would take many years to replace them. Only a few had been 
cut down, but to what length would this destruction be carried? Huyay 
sent word to the Prophet that they would leave their land, but the Prophet 
said he was no longer prepared to agree that they should take all their 
possessions into exile with them. “Leave your land,” he said, “and take 
with you all that your camels can carry, except your arms and armour.” 

Huyay at first refused, but his fellow tribesmen compelled him to accept; 
and they resumed the preparations that had been cut short two weeks 
previously. The doors of their houses and even the lintels were loaded on to 
their camels; and when all was ready they set off for the north upon the 
road to Syria. Never had a caravan of such magnificence been seen within 
living memory. As they made their way through the crowded market of 


1 K. LIX, 5. 



Bani Nadir 205 

Medina, the camels went into single file, and each one as it passed was an 
object of wonder, both for the richness of its trappings and the wealth of its 
load. The splendid curtains of the howdahs were drawn back to display the 
women in their garments of silk or brocade, or velvet, green or red, most of 
them laden with ornaments of the finest gold, set with rubies, emeralds and 
other precious stones. The Bani Nadir were known to be opulent, but until 
now only a small portion of their riches had been seen by others than 
themselves. They went on their way to the music of timbrels and fifes, and 
proudly gave it out that if they had left their palms behind them, they had 
others equally good elsewhere, and to those they were now going. Many of 
them stopped and settled on land which they owned in Khaybar, but others 
went further north and settled in Jericho or in the south of Syria. According 
to the Revelation, the land of the Bani Nadir and all that they left behind 
them was the possession of the Prophet, to be given to the poor and needy, 
and in particular to the poor emigrants who have been driven from their 
homes . 1 Only two of the Helpers were given a share, and that was on 
account of their poverty. But by giving the main part to the Emigrants the 
Prophet made them independent, and thus relieved the Helpers of a heavy 
burden. 

1 LIX, 8. 



LVIII 

Feace and War 


D URING the months which followed, soon after the New Year of 
ad 6 z 6 , Fatimah gave birth to another son. The Prophet was so 
pleased with the name al-Hasan that he now named the younger 
brother al-Husayn, which means “the little Hasan,” that is “the little 
beautiful one.” About the same time his new wife, Zaynab, “the mother of 
the poor,” fell ill and died, less than eight months after he had married her. 
He led her funeral prayer and buried her in the BaqP not far from the grave 
of his daughter Ruqayyah. The next month his cousin Abu Salamah died of 
a wound from Uhud which had closed too soon and broken out afresh. The 
Prophet was with him at the end and prayed for him as he was breathing 
his last; and it was the Prophet who closed his eyes when he was dead. 

Abu Salamah and his wife had been a most devoted couple, and she had 
wanted him to make a pact with her that if one of them died the other 
would not marry again, but he told her that if he died first she should marry 
again, and he prayed: “God grant Umm Salamah after me a man who is 
better than me, one who will cause her no sadness and no hurt.” Four 
months after his death the Prophet came and asked for her hand in 
marriage. She repl ied that she feared she was not a suitable match for him. 
“I am a woman whose best time hath gone,” she said, “and I am the 
mother of orphans. What is more, I have a nature of exceeding jealousy, 
and thou, O Messenger of God, hast already more than one wife.” He 
answered: “As to age, I am older than thou; as to thy jealousy, I will pray 
God to take it from thee; as to thine orphan children, God and His 
Messenger will care for them.” And so they were married, and he lodged 
her in the house which had belonged to Zaynab. 

Despite what she had said of her age, Umm Salamah was still in her 
youth, no more than twenty-nine years old. She had been only eighteen 
when she had emigrated to Abyssinia with Abu Salamah. As regards her 
jealousy, she rightly feared that this marriage would put her to the test, nor 
was she alone in having such fears. ‘A’ishah had accepted Hafsah without 
difficulty, and also Zaynab; but with this new wife it was different, partly 
no doubt because she herself was older, being almost in her fourteenth 
year. She had often met Umm Salamah, and it was together with her that 
she had made the preparations for Fatimah’s wedding. But she had never 
looked on her as a possible rival. Now, however, when everyone in Medina 
was talking of the Prophet’s new marriage and of the great beauty of his 
bride, she was troubled and apprehensive. “I was grievously sad,” she said, 
“for what they told me of her beauty, so I made myself agreeable to her that 



Peace and War 2,07 

1 might observe her closely, and I saw that she was many times more 
beautiful than they had said. I told Haf sah of this and she said: ‘Nay, this is 
naught but thy jealousy; she is not as they say.’ Then she also made herself 
agreeable to Umm Salamah that she might let her own eyes judge, and she 
said: ‘I have observed her, but she is not as thou sayst, nowhere near, yet 
she is indeed beautiful.’ Then I went to see her again, and she was, by my 
life, as Hafsah had said. Yet was 1 jealous.” 1 

The time was drawing near for the second encounter at Badr, in accord¬ 
ance with Abu Sufyan’s parting challenge after Uhud - a challenge which 
the Prophet had accepted. But it was a year of drought, and Abu Sufyan 
saw that there would be not a blade of greenery for their camels and horses 
to eat on the way. All the fodder for the expedition would have to be 
brought with them from Mecca, and their stores were already depleted. 
But he shrank from the dishonour of breaking the tryst which he had 
himself proposed. It was desirable that Muhammad should be the one to 
break it, but reports had come from Yathrib that he was already making 
preparations to set out. Could he be induced to change his mind? Abu 
Sufyan went into consultation with Suhayl and one or two other leaders of 
Quraysh, and they formed a plan. There happened to be in Mecca at that 
time a friend of Suhayl’s named Nu‘aym, one of the leading men of the 
Bani Ashja‘, a clan of Ghatafan. They felt they could trust him, and since 
he was not of Quraysh he could pose as a neutral and objective onlooker. 
They offered him twenty camels if he could induce the Muslims to 
renounce their project of marching out to Badr. Nu‘aym agreed and set out 
at once for the oasis, where he drew an alarming picture of the forces which 
Abu Sufyan was preparing to lead out to Badr. He spoke to all the different 
sections of the community, Emigrants, Helpers, Jews and hypocrites, and 
he would close his assessment of the danger with the urgent counsel: 
“Therefore stay here and go not out against them. By God, I do not think a 
single one of you will escape with his life.” The Jews and the hypocrites 
were glad at the news of Meccan preparations for war, and they helped to 
spread the tidings throughout the city. Nor did Nu‘aym fail to make an 
impression on the Muslims themselves, many of whom were inclined to 
think that it would indeed be most unwise to go out to Badr. News of this 
attitude reached the Prophet, and he began to fear that no one would go 
out with him. But Abu Bakr and ‘Umar urged him on no account to break 
his tryst with Quraysh. “God will support His religion,” they said “and He 
will give strength to His Messenger.” “I will go forth,” said the Prophet, 
“even if I go alone.” 

These few words cost Nu‘aym his camels, making vain all his efforts just 
when he was beginning to think that he had succeeded. But despite himself, 
he was impressed by the total failure of his mission: some power was at 
work in Medina which was altogether beyond his influence, and beyond 
his experience, and the seeds of Islam were sown in his heart. The Prophet 
set out as originally planned with fifteen hundred men on camels and ten 
horsemen. Many of them took merchandise with them, intending to trade 
at the fair of Badr. 

' I.S.VIII,66. 


208 Muhammad 


Meantime Abu Sufyan had said to Quraysh: “Let us go out and spend 
one night or two nights on the road, and then return. If Muhammad go not 
out he will hear that we set forth and that we then returned because he 
came not out to meet us. This will be counted against him and in our 
favour.” But as it happened, the Prophet and his Companions spent eight 
days at the fair of Badr, and those who attended it reported the news far 
and wide that Quraysh had broken their word but that Muhammad and 
his followers had kept theirs and had come to fight Quraysh as they had 
promised. When the news reached Mecca of the great moral yictoryj>f 
their enemy and of their own moral defeat in the eyes of Arabia, Safwan 
and others bitterly upbraided Abu Sufyan for ever having proposed the 
second encounter at Badr. But this mortification none the less served to 
intensify their preparations for the final and lasting revenge which they 
were planning to inflict on the founder and followers of the new re¬ 
ligion. 

After his return from Badr the Prophet had a month of peace in Medina, 
and then at the beginning of the fifth Islamic year, June 626, news came 
that some clans of Ghatafan were again planning to raid the oasis. He set 
out immediately into the plain of Najd with four hundred men, but the 
enemy vanished as before when they were almost upon them. It was on this 
expedition that when they were nearest to an encounter the Prophet 
received the Revelation instructing him how to pray “the Prayer of Fear”, 
that is, how an army should abridge the ritual prayer and modify the 
movements of it at times of danger, and how some should keep watch 
while others pray. 1 

One of the Helpers who went out with this force was Jabir the son of 
‘Abd Allah. In after years he would tell of an incident which took place at 
one of their encampments: “We were with the Prophet when a Companion 
brought in a fledgling which he had caught, and one of the parent birds 
came and threw itself into the hands of him who had taken its young. I saw 
men’s faces full of wonderment, and the Prophet said: *Do ye wonder at 
this bird? Ye have taken its young, and it hath thrown itself down in 
merciful tenderness unto its young. Yet I swear by God, your Lord is more 
merciful unto you than is this bird unto its fledgling.’ 2 And he told the man 
to put back the young bird where he had found it,” 

He also said: “God hath a hundred mercies, and one of them hath He 
sent down amongst jinn and men and cattle and beasts of prey. Thereby 
they are kind and merciful unto one another, and thereby the wild creature 
inclineth in tenderness unto her offspring. And ninety-nine mercies hath 
God reserved unto Himself, that therewith He may show mercy unto His 
slaves on the day of the Resurrection.” 3 

Jabir also recounted how on the way back to Medina most of the troops 
went on ahead, while the Prophet and a few others were riding in the rear. 
But Jabir’s camel was old and weak, and could not keep up with the main 
force, so that it was not long before the Prophet overtook him and asked 
him why he was so far behind. “O Messenger of God,” he said, “this camel 
of mine can go no faster.” “Make him kneel,” said the Prophet, making his 
own camel kneel also. Then he said: “Give me that stick,” which I did, and 

1 IV, 101—z. 2 W.487. * M. XLIX, 4. 



Peace and War 209 

he took it and gave him one or two prods with it. Then he told me to 
mount, and we went on our way, and, by Him who sent the Messenger 
with the truth, my camel outstripped his. 

‘On the way I conversed with the Messenger of God, and he said to me: 
“Wilt thou sell me this camel of thine?” I said: “I will give him to thee.” 
“Nay,” he said, “but sell him to me.” Jabir knew from the tone of the 
Prophet’s voice that he was expected to bargain. “I asked him,” said Jabir, 
“to name me a price and he said: ‘1 will take him for a dirhem.’ ‘Not so,’ I 
said, ‘for then wouldst thou be giving me too little.’ ‘For two dirhems,’ he 
said. ‘Nay,’ said I, and he went on raising his price until he reached forty 
dirhems, that is, an ounce of gold, to which I agreed. Then he said: ‘Art 
thou yet married, Jabir?’ And when I said that I was, he said: ‘An already 
married woman or a virgin?’ ‘One already married,’ I said ‘Why not a girl,’ 
he said, ‘that thou mightst play with her and she with thee?’ ‘O Messenger 
of God,’ I said, ‘my father was struck down on the day of Uhud and left me 
with his seven daughters, so I married a motherly woman who would 
gather them round her and comb their hair and look after their wants.’ He 
agreed that I had made a good choice; and then he said that when we 
reached Sirar, which was only about three miles from Medina, he would 
sacrifice camels and spend the day there, and she would have news of our 
home-coming and would set about shaking the dust from her cushions. 
‘We have no cushions,’ I said. ‘They will come,’ he said. ‘So when thou 
returnest, do what is to be done. ’ 

“The morning after we returned, 1 took my camel and knelt him outside 
the Prophet’s door. The Prophet came out and told me to leave the camel 
and pray two prayer cycles in the Mosque, which I did. Then he bade Bilal 
weigh me out an ounce of gold, and he gave me a little more than what 
tipped the scales. I took it and turned to go, but the Prophet called me back. 
‘Take thy camel,’ he said, ‘he is thine, and keep the price thou wast paid for 
him.’” 1 

It was during these months, between one campaign and another, that 
Salman the Persian came to the Prophet to seek his counsel and his help. 
His master, a Jew of the Bani Qurayzah, kept him so hard at work on his 
property to the south of Medina that he had never been able to have a close 
contact with the Muslim community. It had been out of the question for 
him to be at Badr or Uhud or to take part in any of the lesser forays which 
the Prophet had led or sent out during the last four years. Was there no way 
of escape from his present situation? He had asked his master what it 
would cost to set him free, but the price was far beyond his means. He 
would have to pay forty ounces of gold and plant three hundred date 
palms. The Prophet told him to write his master an agreement to pay the 
gold and plant the trees. Then he called on his Companions to help Salman 
with the palms, which they did, one contributing thirty palm-shoots, 
another twenty, and so on, until the full number had been reached. “Go dig 
the holes for them, Salman,” said the Prophet, “and tell me when thou hast 
done, and mine is the hand that shall put them in.” The Companions 
helped Salman to prepare the ground, and the Prophet planted each of the 
three hundred shoots, which all took root and thrived. 

1 I.1.664. 



2.io Muhammad 


As to the remainder of the price, a piece of gold the size of a hen’s egg had 
been given to the Prophet from one of the mines, and he gave it to Salman, 
telling him to buy himself free with it. “How far will this go towards what I 
have to pay?” said Salman, thinking that the price had been greatly 
underestimated. The Prophet took the gold from him and putting it in his 
mouth he rolled his tongue round it. Then he gave it back to Salman, 
saying: “Take it, and pay them the full price with it.” Salman weighed out 
to them forty ounces from it, and so he became a free man. 1 

There was another month of peace in Medina, and then at the head of a 
thousand men the Prophet made a rapid northward march of about five 
hundred miles to the edge of Dumat al-Jandal, an oasis on the borders of 
Syria, which had become infested with marauders, mostly from the Bani 
Kalb. They had more than once plundered provisions of oil and flour and 
other goods which were on their way to Medina. There was also reason to 
suppose that they had entered into some agreement with Quraysh, which 
meant that they would close in from the north when the day came for a 
general onslaught upon Islam. The Prophet and his Companions had that 
day continually in mind; and though the immediate result of the expedi¬ 
tion was no more than the scattering of the marauders and the capture of 
their flocks and herds which were grazing on the southern pastures of the 
oasis, it had also the desired effect of impressing the northern tribes in 
general with a sense of the presence of a new and rapidly increasing power 
in Arabia. Gone were the years of civil discord which had made Yathrib so 
vulnerable to outside attack. That discord had been replaced by a closely 
united expansive strength which could strike far and wide with amazing 
speed, and which was all the more to be feared because it knew that attack 
was the surest means of defence. 

Such was the outward impression; but for those who were capable of 
approaching nearer the strength was seen to be even greater than it 
appeared, for it was based on a unity that was itself a miracle. The 
Revelation had told the Prophet: If thou hadst spent all that is in the earth, 
thou couldst not have united their hearts. But God hath united their 
hearts . 1 The presence of the Prophet was none the less one of the great 
means of realising this unitedness. Providentially, the attraction of that 
presence had been made so powerful that no man of normal good will 
could resist it. “Not one of you hath faith until I am dearer to him than his 
son and his father and all men together.” 3 But this utterance of the Prophet 
was not so much a demand as a confirmation of the rightness of a love that 
had already been given - a love which found its expression so often in the 
words: “May my father and my mother be thy ransom.” 

A time of peace was not a time of rest for the Prophet. He put forward as 
an ideal that a third of each cycle of twenty-four hours should be for 
worship, a third for work and a third for the family. This last third 
included the time spent in sleep and at meals. As to worship, much of it was 
done during the night. In addition to the evening and dawn prayers they 
performed voluntary prayers after the same pattern. The Koran also 


! 1.1.141-z. 


: VIII,63. 


3 M. 1,16. 


Peace and War zu 


enjoined long recitations of its own verses, and the Prophet recommended 
various litanies of repentance and praise. Lengthy night worship had been 
established as a norm by the first Revelations, but the community which 
had received these had been a spiritual elect. Medina had also had its own 
initial elect of believers. But the rapid spread of Islam within recent years 
had made the elect something of a minority; and they are referred to as a 
group of those that are with thee in a verse which was now revealed to 
lessen the sense of obligation attached to long vigils: Verily thy Lord 
knoweth that thou keepest vigil wellnigh two thirds of the night, and some 
times half of it or a third of it, thou and a group of those that are with thee. 
God measureth the night and the day. He knoweth that ye will not be able 
to come up to the full measure of it, and therefore hath He relented unto 
you. Recite then even so much of the Koran as is easy for you} 

The elect of the Companions none the less continued to pray much at 
night, of which the last third was mentioned by the Prophet as being 
especially blessed: “Each night, when a third of it hath yet to come, our 
Lord — blessed and exalted be He! — descendeth unto the nethermost 
heaven, and He saith: ‘Who calleth unto Me, that I may answer him? Who 
prayeth unto Me a prayer, that I may grant him it? Who asketh My 
forgiveness, that I may forgive him?’ ” 2 It was also revealed about this time, 
in definition of the believers: They turn aside from their beds to invoke 
their Lord in fear and in longing, and of what We have given them they 
give. And no soul knoweth the hidden bliss that lieth in store for them as 
meed for that which they were wont to do} 

The equal distribution of the hours of the daily cycle between the three 
claims of worship, work and the family could only be approximate. As 
regards family, the Prophet had no room of his own, and every evening he 
would move to the apartment of the wife whose turn it was to give him a 
home for the next twenty-four hours. During the day he had frequent visits 
from his daughters and from his aunt Safiyyah, or he would visit them. 
Fatimah would often bring her two sons to see him. Hasan was now nearly 
a year and a half old, and the eight-month-old Husayn was already 
beginning to walk. The Prophet also loved his little granddaughter Uma- 
mah, who nearly always accompanied her mother Zaynab. Once or twice 
he brought her with him to the Mosque perched on his shoulder and kept 
her there while he recited the verses of the Koran, putting her down before 
the inclination and prostrations and restoring her to his shoulder when he 
resumed his upright position. 4 Another loved one was the fifteen-year-old 
Usamah, the son of Zayd and Umm Ayman, very dear to the Prophet for 
the sake of both his parents and also for his own sake. As a grandson of the 
house, he was often to be found inside it or about its doors. 

Most afternoons the Prophet would visit Abu Bakr as he had done in 
Mecca. To some extent the claims of family and of work coincided, for he 
often wished to talk with Abu Bakr about affairs of state, as he likewise did 
with Zayd and with his two sons-in-law ‘All and ‘Uthman. But work was 
in danger of invading the Prophet’s whole life, because no voice in all 
Medina could compare with his for solving a problem or answering a 


1 LXXIII, 20. 


2 B. XIX, 12. 


3 XXXII, 16-17. 


4 I.S. VIII, 26. 



2i2 Muhammad 


question or settling a dispute. Even those who did not believe him to be a 
Prophet would seek his help if need be, unless they were too proud. 
Quarrels between Muslims and Jews were not infrequent, and mis¬ 
placed fervour was often to blame, as when, for example, one of the 
Helpers struck a Jew merely on account of an oath which he heard him 
utter. “Wilt thou swear,” said the Muslim, “ ‘by Him who chose Moses 
above all mankind’ when the Prophet is present in our midst?” The Jew 
complained to the Prophet, whose face was full of anger when he rebuked 
the aggressor. In the Koran itself God is mentioned as saying; O Moses, I 
have chosen thee above all mankind by My messages and My speaking 
unto thee} The Koran had also said; Verily God chose Adam and Noah 
and the family of Abraham and the family of‘Imran above all the u/orlds . 2 
But divining what was in the man’s mind, the Prophet added; “Say not 
that I am better than Moses.” 3 He also said, perhaps referring to another 
example of misplaced zeal; “Let none of you say that I am better than 
Jonah.” 4 The Revelation had already given them the words, as part of the 
Islamic creed: We make no distinction between any of His messengersJ 

In addition to what concerned the welfare of the community as a whole, 
both in its inward harmony and in its relations with the rest of Arabia and 
beyond, scarcely a day passed when his advice or help was not sought by 
one or more of the believers in connection with some purely personal 
problem, either material, as in the recent case of Salman, or spiritual, as 
when on one occasion Abu Bakr brought to him a man of the Bani Tamlm, 
Hanzalah by name, who had settled in Medina. Hanzalah had first 
approached Abu Bakr with his problem, but Abu Bakr felt that in this case 
the answer should come from the highest authority. The man’s face was 
full of woe, and when the Prophet questioned him he said: “Hanzalah is a 
hypocrite, O Messenger of God.” The Prophet asked him what he meant, 
and he answered: “O Messenger of God, we are with thee, and thou tellest 
us of the Fire and of Paradise until it is as if they were before our very eyes. 
Then go we out from thy presence, and our minds are engrossed with our 
wives and our children and our properties, and much do we forget.” The 
Prophet’s answer made it clear that the ideal was to seek to perpetuate their 
consciousness of spiritual realities without altering the tenor of their daily 
lives: “By Him in whose hand is my soul,” he said, “if ye were to remain 
perpetually as ye are in my presence, or as ye are in your times of 
remembrance of God, then would the Angels come to take you by the hand 
as ye lie in your beds or as ye go your ways. But yet, O Hanzalah, now this 
and now that, now this and now that, now this and now that!” 6 

Such demands as these upon the Prophet’s time were not to be avoided; 
but there was a growing need that he should be protected in other ways, 
and the protection that now came was not unconnected with the following 
altogether unexpected event which served to emphasise his uniquely 
privileged position. It happened one day that he wanted to speak to Zayd 
about something and went to his house. Zaynab opened the door, and as 
she stood in the doorway telling him that Zayd was out but inviting him 

1 VII, 144. 2 111,33. 3 B.LXV, Surah VII. 

4 B. LXV, Surah XXXVII. 5 Seep.ioz 6 M. XLIX, z. 



Peace and War Z13 


none the less to enter, a look passed between the two cousins which made 
each one conscious of a deep and lasting bond of love between them. In a 
moment the Prophet knew that Zaynab loved him and that he loved her 
and that she knew he loved her. But what could this mean? Surprised at the 
strength of his feeling, he refused her invitation, and as he turned to go she 
heard him say: “Glory be to God the Infinite! Glory be to Him who 
disposeth men’s hearts!” When Zayd returned she told him of the 
Prophet’s visit and of the glorification she had heard him utter. Zayd 
immediately went to him and said: “I have been told thou earnest unto my 
house. Why didst not enter, thou who art more to me than my father and 
my mother? Was it that Zaynab hath found favour with thee? If it be so, I 
will leave her.” “Keep thy wife and fear God,” said the Prophet with some 
insistence. He had said on another occasion: “Of .all things licit the most 
hateful unto God is divorce.” 1 And when Zayd came again the next day 
with the same proposal, again the Prophet insisted that he should keep his 
wife. But the marriage between Zayd and Zaynab had not been a happy 
one, and Zayd found it no longer tolerable, so by mutual agreement with 
Zaynab he divorced her. This did not, however, make Zaynab eligible as a 
wife for the Prophet for although the Koran had only specified that men 
were forbidden to marry the wives of sons sprung front their loins , it was a 
strong social principle not to make a distinction between sons by birth and 
sons by adoption. Nor was the Prophet himself eligible, for he had already 
four wives, the most that the Islamic law allows. 

Some months passed and then one day when the Prophet was talking 
with one of his wives the power of the Revelation overwhelmed him; and 
when he came to himself his first words were: “Who will go unto Zaynab 
and tell her the good tidings that God hath given her to me in marriage, 
even from Heaven?” Salma was near at hand- Safiyyah’s servant who had 
long considered herself a member of the Prophet’s household - and she 
went in haste to Zaynab’s house. When she heard the wonderful tidings, 
Zaynab magnified God and threw herself down in prostration towards 
Mecca. Then she took off her anklets and bracelets of silver, and gave them 
to Salma. 

Zaynab was no longer young, being almost in her fortieth year, but she 
had retained her remarkable beauty. She was, moreover, a woman of great 
piety, who fasted much and kept long vigils and gave generously to the 
poor. As a skilled worker in leather she could make shoes and other 
objects, and all that she earned in this way was for her a means of charity. 
There could be no question in her case of any formal wedding, for the 
marriage was announced in the revealed verses as a bond already con¬ 
tracted: We have married her to thee . 1 It remained for the bride to be 
brought to the bridegroom, and this was done without delay. 

The verses also said that in future adopted sons should be named after 
their fathers who begot them; and from that day Zayd was known as Zayd 
ibn Harithah instead of Zayd ibn Muhammad, as he had been called ever 
since his adoption some thirty-five years previously. But this change did 
not annul his adoption as such, nor did it affect in any way the love and the 


1 A.D. XIII, 3. 


2 XXXIII, 40. 



214 Muhammad 

intimacy between the adopter and the adopted, who were now nearing 
their sixtieth and fiftieth years. It was merely a reminder that there was no 
blood relationship; and in this sense the Revelation continued: Mu¬ 
hammad is not the father of any man amongst you, but he is the Messenger 
of God and the Seal of the Prophets .* 

At the same time other Revelations stressed the great difference between 
the Prophet and his followers. They were not to address him ever by his 
name as they addressed each other. The permission which God had given 
him, in virtue of his new marriage, to have more than four wives, was for 
him alone, and not for the rest of the community. Moreover, his wives 
were given the title of the mothers of the faithful , and their status was such 
that it would be an enormity in the eyes of God if, having been married to 
the Prophet, they should ever be given in marriage to another man. If the 
believers wished to ask a favour of one of them - for their intercession with 
the Prophet was often sought — they must do so from behind a curtain. 
They were also told: O ye who have faith, enter not the dwellings of the 
Prophet unto a meal without waiting for its time to come, except if leave be 
given you. But if ye are invited then enter, and when ye have fed then 
disperse. Linger not in hope of discourse. Verily that would be irksome 
unto the Prophet, and he would shrink from tellingyou, but God shrinketh 
not from the truth . 1 

Such precepts were necessary on account of the great love they bore him, 
and their desire to be in his presence as long and as often as possible. Those 
who were with him were always loath to leave him. Nor could they have 
been blamed if they stayed, for when he spoke to anyone he would turn to 
him so fully and make him so amply the object of his attention that the man 
might well imagine himself to be privileged enough for liberties which 
others dared not take; and when he took a man’s hand he was never the 
first to relinquish his hold. But while protecting the Prophet, the Revela¬ 
tion introduced at this time a new element into the liturgy, which made it 
possible for his people to give expression to their love and to benefit from 
his spiritual radiance without imposing unduly their presences upon him: 
Verily God and His angels whelm in blessings the prophet. O ye who 
believe, invoke blessings upon him and give him greetings of Peace.* And 
shortly afterwards the Prophet told one of his Companions: “An Angel 
came unto me and said: ‘None invoketh blessings upon thee once, but God 
invoketh blessings upon him tenfold.’ ” 4 


1 XXXIII, 37. 


1 XXX 111 ,53. 


3 XXXIII, 56. 


4 D. XX, 58. 


LIX 


The Trench 


T HE exiled Jews of Bani Nadir who had settled in Khaybar were 
determined to recover the land they had lost. Their hopes were 
centred on the preparations of Quraysh for a final attack on the 
Prophet; and towards the end of the fifth year of Islam - it was about the 
New Year of ad 627 - these preparations were brought to a head by a 
secret visit to Mecca of Huyay and other Jewish leaders from Khaybar. 
“We are one with you,” they said to Abu Sufyan, “that we may extirpate 
Muhammad.” “The dearest of men to us”, he replied, “are those who help 
us against Muhammad.” So he and Safwan and other chiefs of Quraysh 
took the Jews inside the Ka‘bah, and together they swore a solemn oath to 
God that they would not fail one another until they had achieved their end 
and aim. Then it occurred to Quraysh that they should take this opportun¬ 
ity of asking the opinion of the Jews about the rights of their conflict with 
the founder of the new religion. “Men of the Jews,” said Abu Sufyan, “ye 
are the people of the first scripture, and ye have knowledge. Tell us how we 
stand with regard unto Muhammad. Is our religion the better or his?” 
They answered: “Your religion is better than his, and ye are nearer the 
truth than he is.” 

On this harmonious basis the two allies laid their plans. The Jews 
undertook to rouse up all the nomads in the plain of Najd who had 
grievances against Medina; and where desire for revenge was not sufficient 
the matter was to be clinched by bribery. The Bani Asad readily agreed to 
help them; as to the Bani Ghatafan, they were promised half the date 
harvest of Khaybar if they would join the confederacy, and their agreement 
to do so increased the army by nearly two thousand men, from the 
Ghatafanite clans of Fazarah, Murrah and Ashja 1 . The Jews also succeeded 
in securing a contingent from the Bani Sulaym seven hundred strong, 
which would no doubt have been larger but for the fact that ever since the 
massacre at the well of Ma‘unah a small but increasing party within this 
tribe had been favourable to Islam. As to the southerly neighbour of 
Sulaym, the Bani ‘Amir, they remained altogether faithful to their pact 
with the Prophet. 

Quraysh themselves and their closest allies were four thousand strong. 
Together with one or two other contingents from the south, they were to 
march out from Mecca along the west coastal route to Medina, the same 
route which they had taken to Uhud. The second army, which was 
considerably less of a unity, was to close in on Medina from the east, that 
is, from the plain of Najd. Together the two armies were estimated at a 


2i 6 Muhammad 


total of more than three times the strength of Quraysh at Uhud. There the 
Muslims had been defeated by a force of three thousand. What could they 
now hope to do against ten thousand? Moreover, instead of a troop of only 
two hundred horse, Quraysh had this time three hundred and could rely on 
Ghatafan for another troop of the same strength. 

They marched forth from Mecca according to plan; and about the same 
time, possibly with the connivance of ‘Abbas, a number of horsemen from 
the Bani Khuza‘ah set out with all speed for Medina to warn the Prophet of 
the impending attack and to give him details of its strength. They reached 
him in four days, thus giving him only a week to make preparations. He 
at once alerted the whole oasis and spoke words of encouragement to his 
followers, promising them the victory if only they would have patience and 
fear God and obey orders. Then, as he had done at Uhud, he summoned 
them to a consultation at which many opinions were expressed as to what 
would be the best plan of action; but finally Salman rose to his feet and 
said: “O Messenger of God, in Persia when we feared an attack of horse, 
we would surround ourselves with a trench, so let us dig a trench about us 
now.” Everyone agreed to this plan with enthusiasm, the more so as they 
were averse to repeating the strategy of Uhud. 

Time was short and all efforts would have to be strained to the utmost if 
no dangerous gap was to be left in the defences. But the trench did not need 
to be continuous; at many places a long stretch of fortress-like houses at 
the edge of the city was adequate protection; and to the north-west there 
were some masses of rock which in themselves were impregnable and 
merely needed to be connected to each other. The nearest of these, known 
as Mount Sal‘, was to be brought within the entrenchments, for the ground 
in front of it was an excellent site for the camp. The trench itself would 
bound the camp to the north in a wide sweep from one of the rocky 
eminences to a point on the eastern wall of the town. This was to be the 
longest single stretch of trench and also the most important. 

As well as being the originator of the strategy, Salman knew exactly how 
wide and how deep the trench would have to be; and having worked with 
the Bani Qurayzah, he knew that they possessed all the implements that 
were needed. Nor were they averse to lending them in the face of the 
common danger;, for although they had no love for the Prophet the 
majority of opinion amongst them had been that their pact with him was a 
political advantage, not to be thrown away. So mattocks, pickaxes and 
shovels were borrowed from them. They also supplied date-baskets which 
were strongly woven of palm-fibre and could thus be used for carrying the 
excavated earth. 

The Prophet made each section of his community responsible for a part 
of the trench and he himself worked with them. They went out at dawn 
every day immediately after the prayers, and came home at twilight. As he 
led them out one of the first mornings he chanted a reminder of their work 
at building the Mosque: 

“O God, no good is but the good hereafter. 

Forgive the Helpers and the Emigrants!” 


The Trench 217 

It was immediately taken up by them all; and sometimes they chanted: 

“O God, no life is but the life hereafter. 

Have mercy on the Helpers and the Emigrants!” 

They continually reminded each other that the time was short. The 
enemy would soon be upon them, and if any man showed signs of flagging 
he was at once an object of mockery. Salman, on the other hand, was an 
object of admiration, for he was not only very strong and able-bodied but 
for years he had been used to digging and carrying for the Bani Qurayzah. 
“He doth the work of ten men,” they said, and a friendly rivalry started up 
between them. “Salman is ours,” the Emigrants claimed, in virtue of his 
having left many homes in search of guidance. “He is one of us,” the 
Helpers retorted; “we have more right to him.” But the Prophet said: 
“Salman is one of us, the people of the House.” 1 

Excavated rocks and stones that might serve as missiles were piled up 
along the Medina side of the trench; the earth they carried away in baskets 
on their heads, and having dumped it they filled the baskets with stones 
which they brought back to the trench. The best stones were to be found at 
the foot of Mount SaP. The men were all stripped to the waist, and those 
who could not lay hands on baskets knotted into sacks the outer garments 
they had doffed and used them to shift the earth and also the stones. On the 
first morning they had been followed out to the camp by a number of boys, 
all eager to take part in the work. The youngest had been sent home 
forthwith, but the Prophet allowed many of the others to dig and carry on 
the understanding that they would have to leave the camp as soon as the 
enemy appeared. As to those who had been sent home from Uhud, Usamah 
and ‘Umar’s son ‘ Abd Allah and their friends, they were now fifteen years 
old, and they and others of their age were allowed to join the ranks of the 
men not only for the work but also for the battle when it came. One of 
them, Bara’ of the Harithah clan of Aws, would tell in after years of the 
great beauty of the Prophet as he remembered him at the trench, girt with a 
red cloak, his breast sprinkled with dust and his black hair long enough to 
touch his shoulders. “More beautiful than him 1 have not seen,” he would 
say. Nor was he alone conscious of this beauty, and of the general beauty 
of the scene. In particular the Prophet himself, as he looked about him, 
rejoiced at their simplicity and their nearness to nature - the nearness to 
man’s primordial heritage - and he started a song in which everyone 
joined: 


“This beauty not the beauty is of Khaybar, 

More innocent it is, O Lord, and purer.” 2 

He worked now with the Emigrants, and now with the Helpers, 
sometimes with a pickaxe, sometimes with a shovel and sometimes as a 
carrier. But wherever he might be, it was understood that he must be 
informed of any unusual difficulty. Despite the hardness of the work there 


The Prophet’s family. 


2 W.446. 


2i 8 Muhammad 


were moments of merriment. A convert from the Bani Damrah, one of the 
People of the Bench who lived in the Mosque, was a man of considerable 
piety but in looks he was not well favoured and his parents had moreover 
given him the name Ju‘ayl, which has the secondary meaning of “little 
beetle”. The Prophet had recently changed this to the fine name of ‘Amr, 
which means life, spiritual well-being, religion. The sight of the Damrite 
digging at the trench prompted one of the Emigrants to a couplet: 

“His name he changed, Ju‘ayl to ‘Amr, 

Gave the poor man that day his help.” 

He repeated this to ‘Amr, and those who overheard it took it up and made 
a song of it, not without laughter. The Prophet joined in this only at the 
words “ ‘Amr” and “help”, which he pronounced each time with consider¬ 
able emphasis. Then he led them into another song: 

“Lord but for Thee we never had been guided, 

Never had given alms nor prayed Thy prayer. 

Send then serenity upon us, 

Make firm our feet for the encounter. 

These foes oppressed us, sought to pervert us, 

But we refused.” 1 

The first cry for help came from Jabir, who had dug down to a rock 
which none of their implements could loosen. The Prophet called for some 
water and spat into it; then having prayed, he sprinkled the water over the 
rock, and they were able to shovel it out like a heap of sand. 2 Another day it 
was the Emigrants who needed help. After many vain attempts to split or 
dislodge a rock he had struck, ‘Umar went to the Prophet, who took the 
pickaxe from him and gave the rock a blow at which a flare as of lightning 
flashed back over the city and towards the south. He gave it another blow 
and again there was a flash but in the direction of Uhud and beyond it 
towards the north. A third blow split the rock into fragments, and this time 
the light flashed eastwards. Salman saw the three flashes and knew they 
must have some significance, so he asked for an interpretation from the 
Prophet, who said: “Didst thou see them, Salman? By the light of the first 1 
saw the castles of the Yemen; by the light of the second I saw the castles of 
Syria; by the light of the third I saw the white palace of Kisra 1 at Mada’in. 
Through the first hath God opened unto me the Yemen; through the 
second hath He opened unto me Syria and the West; and through the third 
the East.” 4 

Most of the diggers at the trench had not normally enough to eat, and 
the hard work increased the pangs of hunger. In particular, Jabir had been 
struck by the Prophet’s exceeding leanness the day he had needed his help 
at the trench, and that evening he asked his wife if she could not cook him a 
meal. “We have naught but this ewe,” she said “and a measure of barley.” 
So he sacrificed the ewe, and the next day she roasted it and ground the 

1 W. 448-9; I.S. H/1,51. 2 I.I.671. 

5 Chrosroes, King of Persia. 4 W. 450. 



The Trench Z19 

barley and made some bread. Then, when it was too dark to continue 
working, Jabir went to the Prophet as he was leaving the trench and invited 
him to the meal of mutton and barley bread. “The Prophet put his palm 
against mine”, said Jabir, “and knotted his fingers through my fingers. I 
wanted him to come alone, but he told a crier to call out: ‘Go with the 
Messenger of God unto the house of Jabir. Respond, for Jabir inviteth 
you.’ ” Jabir uttered the verse which the faithful are recommended to utter 
at a moment of disaster: Verily we are for God, and verily unto Him are we 
returning , and he went on ahead to warn his wife. “Didst thou invite them 
or did he?” she said. “Nay, he invited them,” said Jabir. “Then let them 
come,” she said, “for he knoweth best.” The meal was placed in front of 
the Prophet and he blessed it and uttered the Name of God over it and 
began to eat. There were ten sitting down with him, and when they had all 
eaten their fill they rose and went to their homes, making room for ten 
more, and so it went on until all the workers at the trench had satisfied their 
hunger, and there still remained some mutton and some bread. 1 

On another day the Prophet saw a girl enter the camp with something in 
her hand, and he called her to him. It was the niece of ‘Abd Allah ibn 
Rawahah. In her own words: “When I told the Messenger of God that I 
was taking some dates to my father and mine uncle, he bade me give them 
to him. So I poured them into his hands, but they did not fill them. He 
called for a garment, which was spread out for him, and he threw the dates 
upon it in such wise that they were scattered over its surface. Then he bade 
those who were with him invite the diggers to lunch, and when they came 
they began to eat, and the dates increased and they were still overflowing 
from the edges of the garment when the men turned away from them.” 2 

1 I.1.67a; W. 45Z. 2 1.1.67a. 



LX 


The Siege 


S CARCELY had the trench been finished - it took them six days in all 
- when news came that the army of Quraysh were approaching down 
the valley of ‘Aqlq and were now a little to the south-west of the town, 
while Ghatafan and the other tribes of Najd were moving towards Uhud 
from the east. All the outlying houses of the oasis had already been 
evacuated and their tenants housed within the defences. The Prophet now 
gave orders for every woman and child to be allocated a place in one or 
other of the upper rooms of the fortresses. Then he encamped with his 
men, about three thousand in all, on the chosen site. His tent of red leather 
was pitched at the foot of Mount Sal‘. ‘A’ishah, Umm Salamah and 
Zaynab took turns to be with him there. 

The Meccan army and their allies pitched separate camps not far from 
Uhud. Quraysh were dismayed to find that the crops of the oasis had 
already been harvested. Their camels would have to subsist on the acacias 
of the valley of ‘Aqlq. Meantime the camels of Ghatafan were living on the 
two kinds of tamarisk which grow in the thicketed parts of the plain near 
Uhud. But there was nothing for the horses of either army except the 
fodder they had brought with them. It was therefore imperative to make an 
end of the enemy as quickly as possible, and with this intention the two 
armies joined together and advanced in the direction of the city. Abu 
Sufyan was commander-in-chief, but by turns each of the various leaders 
was to have his day of honour in which he would direct the actual fighting. 
Khalid and ‘Ikrimah were again in command of the Meccan cavalry, and 
‘Amr was in Khalid’s troop. As they approached they were heartened to see 
the enemy camp in front of them outside the town. They had been afraid 
that they would find them garrisoned behind their battlements; but out in 
the open they should be able to overwhelm them by sheer weight of 
numbers. When they drew nearer, however, they were amazed to see that a 
broad trench lay between them and the archers who were lined the whole 
way along it on its further side. Their horse would only be able to reach it 
with difficulty, and then would come the greater difficulty of crossing it. 
Even now a shower of arrows told them that they were already within 
range of the enemy, so they drew back to a safer distance. 

The rest of the day was spent in consultation and finally they decided 
that their best hope lay in the possibility of forcing the enemy to withdraw 
their troops in large numbers from the north of the town in order to defend 
it elsewhere. If the trench were sufficiently unmanned, it should not be too 
difficult to cross it. Their thoughts turned towards the Bani Qurayzah, 



The Siege zzi 

whose fortresses blocked the approach to Medina from the south-east. 
According to agreement, Huyay of the Bani Nadir had come from 
Khaybar to join the army, and he now pressed his services on Abu Sufyan 
as ambassador to his fellow Jews, assuring him that he could easily 
persuade them to break their pact with Muhammad; and once their help 
had been secured the town could be attacked from two directions simul¬ 
taneously. Abu Sufyan gladly accepted his offer, and urged him to lose no 
time. 

The Bani Qurayzah were afraid of Huyay; they looked on him as a 
bearer of bad fortune, an inauspicious man who had brought disaster upon 
his own people, and who would do the same for them if they let him have 
his way. They feared him all the more because he had an overwhelming 
power of soul that was difficult to counter. If he wanted something, he 
would wear down all opposition and neither rest himself nor let others rest 
until he had gained his end. He now went to the fortress of Ka‘b ibn Asad, 
the chief of Qurayzah — it was he who had made their pact with the 
Prophet - and knocked on the gate, announcing who he was. Ka‘b at first 
refused to unbolt it. “Confound thee, Ka‘b,” said Huyay, “let me in.” 
“Confound thee, Huyay,” said Ka‘b, knowing well what he wanted. “I 
have made a pact with Muhammad, and I will not break what is between 
me and him.” “Let me in,” said Huyay, “and let us talk.” “I will not,” said 
Ka‘b; but finally Huyay accused him of not letting him in simply because 
he grudged sharing his food with him, and this so angered Ka‘b that he 
opened the gate. “Confound thee, Ka‘b,” he said, “I have brought thee 
lasting glory for all time and power like that of a raging sea. 1 have brought 
thee Quraysh and Kinanah and Ghatafan with their leaders and chiefs, a 
full ten thousand of them, with their horse a thousand strong. They have 
sworn to me that they will not rest until they have rooted out Muhammad 
and those with him. This time Muhammad shall not escape.” “By God,” 
said Ka'b, “thou hast brought me shame for all time - a cloud without 
water, all thunder and lightning, and naught else in it. Confound thee, 
Huyay. Leave me and let me be as I am.” Huyay saw that he was 
weakening, and his eloquent tongue enlarged on the great advantages that 
would come to them all if the new religion were blotted out. Finally, he 
swore by God the most solemn oath: “If Quraysh and Ghatafan return to 
their territories and have not smitten down Muhammad, I will enter with 
thee into thy fortress, and my fate shall be as thine.” This convinced Ka‘b 
that there could be no possibility of survival for Islam, and he agreed to 
renounce the pact between his people and the Prophet. Huyay asked to see 
the document, and when he had read it he tore it in two. Ka‘b now went to 
tell his fellow tribesmen what had passed between them. “What advantage 
is it,” they said, “if thou art slain, that Huyay should be slain with thee?” 
and at first he met with considerable opposition. It was amongst the Bani 
Qurayzah that Ibn al-Hayyaban had come to live, the old Jew from Syria 
who had hoped to meet the coming Prophet and who had described him 
and insisted that his advent was at hand, and many of them felt that 
Muhammad must indeed be the man, though few of these were capable of 
being interested in a Prophet who was not a Jew, and still fewer were 
capable of drawing any practical conclusions about the gravity of oppos- 



222 Muhammad 


ing a Prophet, be he Jew or Gentile. As for the majority, they were simply 
averse to breaking a political pact; but when some of the hypocrites 
brought news which confirmed what Huyay had said, and when some of 
their own men went singly and unobtrusively to see for themselves, the 
general opinion began to swing in favour of Quraysh and their allies. It was 
indeed a formidable sight, looking across the trench from the Medina side, 
to see the plain beyond it surging with men and horses as far and wide as 
the eye could reach. 

Meantime Khalid and ‘Ikrimah were examining the trench, albeit from a 
distance, to see where it might most easily be crossed. “This piece of 
trickery!” they exclaimed in exasperation. “Never have Arabs resorted to 
such a device. There must surely be with him a man of Persia.” To their 
disappointment they saw that the work had been all too well done, except 
for a short section which was slightly narrower than the rest, and this was 
closely guarded. One or two attempts to storm it were a total failure. Their 
horses had never seen anything like the trench and manifested a strong 
aversion for it. This might change, but for the moment the fighting could be 
no more than an interchange of archery. 

The Bani Qurayzah’s renunciation of their pact did not remain hidden. 
Many of the hypocrites were undetermined as to which side they belonged 
to, and they were ready to betray the secrets of either side to the other. 
‘Umar was the first of the Companions to hear that the Jews were now a 
potential enemy. He went to the Prophet, who was sitting in his tent with 
Abu Bakr. “O Messenger of God,” he said, “I have been told that Bani 
Qurayzah have broken their treaty and are at war with us.” The Prophet 
was visibly troubled; and he sent Zubayr to find out the truth of the matter. 
Then, lest the Helpers should feel themselves to have been excluded, he 
called the two Sa‘ds of Aws and Khazraj to him together with Usayd, and 
having told them the news he said: “Go and see if it be true. If it be false, 
then say so plainly. But if it be true, then tell me in some subtle way that I 
shall understand.” They reached the fortresses of Qurayzah soon after 
Zubayr and found that they had indeed renounced the pact. They adjured 
them by God to revert to it again before it was too late, but they only 
answered: “Who is the Messenger of God? There is no pact between us and 
Muhammad nor any agreement.” In vain they reminded them of the fates 
of the Bani Qaynuqac and the Bani Nadir. Ka‘b and the others were now 
too confident of the victory of Quraysh to listen to them; and when they 
saw that they were wasting their words they returned to the Prophet. 
“ ‘Adal and Qarah,” they said to him, these being the two tribes who had 
betrayed Khubayb and his companions to the men of Hudhayl. The 
Prophet understood and magnified God: “Allahu Akbar! Be of good cheer, 
O Muslims.” 

It was now necessary to reduce the strength of the forces at the trench 
and to keep a garrison within the town itself, so the Prophet sent back a 
hundred men. Then the warning came to him that Huyay was urging 
Quraysh and Ghatafan to send by night each a thousand men to the 
fortresses of Qurayzah and from there to raid the centre of the town and 
break into the fortresses of the Muslims and carry off their women and 
children. The appointed night, for various reasons, was put off more than 



The Siege 223 


once, and the project was never realised; but as soon as the Prophet heard 
of it he sent Zayd with a troop of three hundred horse to patrol the streets, 
magnifying God throughout each night, and it was as if the city was filled 
with a mighty host. 

The horses were not needed at the camp, but the troops were sorely 
missed, for the trench had to be manned day and night, so that each man 
now kept watch for longer hours. The days passed and the strain was very 
great, with Khalid and ‘Ikrimah and their men ever seeking to take 
advantage of a moment of slackness. But only once did they succeed in 
crossing the trench, and that was when ‘Ikrimah suddenly noticed that the 
narrowest section happened for the moment to be badly guarded. He 
succeeded in making his horse leap the gap, and he was followed by three 
others. But by the time the fourth man had crossed, ‘All and those with him 
had remanned the narrow sector and made it once more impregnable, 
thereby also cutting off the retreat of the horsemen who were now on their 
side. One of these, ‘Amr, shouted a challenge to single combat. When ‘All 
offered himself he refused, saying: “I hate to kill the like of thee. Thy father 
was a boon companion of mine. Therefore go back, thou art but a 
stripling.” But ‘All insisted, so ‘Amr dismounted and both men advanced. 
A cloud of dust soon hid them from view; then they heard ‘All’s voice 
raised in magnification and they knew that ‘Amr was dead or dying. 
Meantime ‘Ikrimah and his fellows took advantage of the distraction to 
regain the other side, but Nawfal of Makhzum failed to clear the gap and 
his horse fell with him into the trench. They began to stone him but he 
called out: “O Arabs, death is better than this,” so they went down and 
dispatched him. 

The crossing of the trench, although abortive, had shown that it was a 
possibility; and the next day attacks had been made at various points even 
before sunrise. The Prophet exhorted the believers and promised them the 
victory if they were steadfast, and steadfast they remained, despite their 
initial weariness from the strain of overlong watches. The site of the camp 
had been well chosen, for the slope of the ground away from Mount Sal‘ 
meant that the near bank was considerably higher than the far bank. Again 
and again throughout the day the enemy tried to force their way across, but 
they could achieve nothing, and the actual fighting was limited, as on 
previous days, to a discharge of archery. Nor was anyone killed on either 
side, but Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh was struck in the arm by an arrow which severed 
a vein, and many of the horses of Quraysh and Ghatafan were wounded. 

The time for the noon prayer came, but there was no question of any 
man relaxing his vigilance for a moment. When the time was running out, 
those who were nearest the Prophet called to him: “O Messenger of God, 
we have not prayed” - an obvious fact but greatly disturbing because such 
a thing had never happened before since the outset of Islam. His rejoinder 
reassured them somewhat: “Nor I, by God, I have not prayed.” The time 
for the mid-afternoon prayer came, and went with the setting of the sun. 
But even so the enemy kept up their attacks, and it was only when the last 
light had faded from the west that they moved back to their two camps. As 
soon as they were out of sight the Prophet withdrew from the trench, 
leaving Usayd to continue on guard with a detachment of men, while he 



224 Muhammad 

himself led the remainder in the four prayers which were now incumbent. 
Khalid suddenly reappeared later that evening with a body of horse in the 
hope that he would find the trench unguarded, but Usayd and his archers 
kept them at bay. 

The Revelation referred to the strain of those days as the time when eyes 
could no longer look with steadiness, and when mens hearts rose up into 
their throats, and ye were thinking strange thoughts about God. There the 
believers were tested and tried, and their souls were quaked with a mighty 
quaking. 1 

The question arose in every mind as to how many more such days could 
be endured. Food was beginning to run short and the nights were 
exceptionally cold; and many of the weak in faith, unnerved by hunger and 
cold and lack of sleep, were almost ready to join the hypocrites, who were 
passing round the word that it was not possible to continue to resist such 
an enemy with only a trench between them, and that they should withdraw 
behind the city walls. But the faith of the true believers was confirmed by 
the hardship, and they received praise from the Revelation for having said, 
at the times of greatest stress, when they saw the clans massed together 
against them: This is that which God and His Messenger did promise us. 
That which God and His Messenger foretold hath truly come to pass. The 
Revelation added: And it did but increase them in faith and in submission . 2 
They had spoken thus in recollection of a verse that had been revealed to 
the Prophet two or three years previously: Think ye to enter Paradise, 
while yet there hath not come unto you the like of what came unto those 
who passed away before youf Affliction smote them and injuries and they 
were made to quake until the Messenger of God said, and with him those 
who believed: When cometh the help of God? Lo, verily the help of God is 
nigh.' 

The Prophet knew that in many souls amongst his people the powers of 
endurance were nearing their end. But he knew also that as each day passed 
the enemy likewise felt the grip of hardship tighten upon them. So he found 
a way of sending word by night to two of the chiefs of Ghatafan, offering 
them a third of the date harvest of Medina if they would withdraw from 
the field. They sent back word: “Give us half the dates of Medina.” But he 
refused to increase his offer of a third, and they agreed to this, whereupon 
he sent for ‘Uthman and told him to draw up a peace treaty between the 
believers and the clans of Ghatafan. Then he sent for the two Sa‘ds and 
they came to his tent - the chief of Aws with his wounded arm bound up - 
and he told them of his plan. They said: “O Messenger of God, is this 
something which thou wouldst have us do, or which God hath command¬ 
ed and must be done? Or is it something which thou doest for our sakes?” 
He answered them: “It is something which I do for your sakes, and by God 
I would not do it but that I see the Arabs have shot at you from one bow 
and assailed you from every side, and I would break some of the sharpness 
of their assault against you.” But the wounded Sa‘d said to him: “O 
Messenger of God, we and these folk were believers in gods together with 
God, worshippers of idols, not truly worshipping God nor knowing Him. 

1 XXXIII, io-ii. 2 XXXIII, 22. 3 II,2i 4 . 



The Siege 225 

They then had no hope to eat one date of ours, save as guests or by barter. 
And now that God hath endowed us with Islam and guided us and 
strengthened us with thee and with it, shall we give them our goods? By 
God, we will give them naught but the sword, until He decide between us.” 
“Be it as thou wilt,” said the Prophet, and Sa‘d took the pen and the vellum 
from ‘Uthman and struck through what had been written, saying: “Let 
them do their worst!” 1 

These negotiations which now came to nothing had been with the chiefs 
of the two clans of Fazarah and Murrah. The third Ghatafanite ally of 
Quraysh was the clan of Ashja‘ to which Nu‘aym belonged, the man whom 
Abu Sufyan and Suhayl had bribed to intimidate, if he could, the Muslims 
from keeping their promise to meet the Meccans at the second Badr. His 
stay in Medina had profoundly affected him, and it was therefore with 
mixed feelings that he had now come out with the rest of his clan to 
support the Meccans on this occasion. His admiration for the men of the 
new religion had been confirmed and increased by their resistance to an 
army more than three times their strength. Then came the hour when, as he 
himself said, “God cast Islam into my heart”; and that night - it was 
almost immediately after the project of a separate truce with Ghatafan had 
been abandoned - he made his way into the city and thence to the camp, 
where he asked to see the Prophet. “What hath brought thee here, 
Nu‘aym?” he said. “I have come,” he answered, “to declare my belief in 
thy word and testify that thou hast brought the truth. So bid me do what 
thou wilt, O Messenger of God, for thou hast but to command me, and I 
will fulfil thy behest. My people and others know naught of my Islam.” 
“To the utmost of thy power,” replied the Prophet, “set them at odds with 
each other.” Nu‘aym asked permission to lie and the Prophet said. “Say 
what thou wilt to draw them off from us, for war is deception.” 2 

Nu‘aym went back through the town and made his way to the Bani 
Qurayzah, who welcomed him as an old friend and offered him food and 
drink. “I came not for this,” he said, “but to warn you of my fears for your 
safety and to give you my counsel.” Then he proceeded to point out to 
them that if Quraysh and Ghatafan failed to inflict a decisive defeat on 
their enemy they would return home and leave the Jews at the mercy of 
Muhammad and his followers. Therefore they should refuse to strike one 
blow for Quraysh until they had been given leading men as hostages, in 
guarantee that they would not withdraw until the enemy had been 
overwhelmed. His advice was accepted with enthusiasm by the Bani 
Qurayzah, who had been increasingly beset by the very fears he had 
touched on. So they agreed to do what he had said, and promised not to tell 
his own people or Quraysh that it was he who had given them this counsel. 

Then he went to his one-time friend Abu Sufyan and told him and the 
other chiefs of Quraysh who were with him that he had a very serious piece 
of information to impart, on the condition, which they agreed to, that they 
would swear to tell no one that he was their informer. “The Jews regret 
their treatment of Muhammad,” he said, “and they have sent to him 
saying: ‘We regret what we have done, and will it satisfy thee if we take as 


I.1. 676. 


1 I.1.68i; W. 480-1. 



22 6 Muhammad 


hostages some of the leading men of Quraysh and Ghatafan and give them 
to thee that thou mayst cut off their heads? Then will we fight with thee 
against those that be left.’ Muhammad hath sent them his agreement; so if 
the Jews ask you for some of your men as hostages, give them not one man 
of yours.” Then he went to his own people and the other clans of Ghatafan 
and told them the same as he had told Quraysh. 

After consultation, the leaders of the two invading armies decided to say 
nothing for the moment to Huyay, but to put to the test what Nu‘aym had 
said. So they sent ‘Ikrimah to the Bani Qurayzah with the message: “Make 
ye ready to fight on the morrow, that once and for all we may rid ourselves 
of Muhammad.” They answered: “Tomorrow is the Sabbath; nor in any 
case will we fight with you against Muhammad unless ye give us hostages 
who shall be for us as a security until we have made an end of him. For we 
fear that if the battle go against you ye will withdraw to your own country, 
leaving us with that man in ours, and we cannot face him alone.” When 
this message reached Quraysh and Ghatafan they said: “By God, what 
Nu‘aym told us is indeed the truth.” And they sent again to Bani Qurayzah 
saying that they would not give them a single man, but bidding them fight 
none the less, which drew from them the answer that they would not strike 
one blow until they had received hostages, 

Abu Sufyan now went to Huyay and said: “Where is the help thou didst 
promise us from thy people? They have deserted us, and now they seek to 
betray us.” “By the Torah, nay!” said Huyay. “The Sabbath is here, and 
we cannot break the Sabbath. But on Sunday they will fight against 
Muhammad and his companions like blazing fire.” It was only then that 
Abu Sufyan told him about the demand for hostages. Huyay was visibly 
taken aback, and interpreting his disconcertedness as a sign of guilt, Abu 
Sufyan said: “I swear by al-Lat that this is naught but your treachery, 
theirs and thine, for I account thee as having entered into the treachery of 
thy people.” “Nay,” he protested, “by the Torah that was revealed unto 
Moses on the day of Mount Sinai, I am no traitor.” But Abu Sufyan was 
unconvinced, and fearing for his life, Huyay left the camp and made his 
way to the fortresses of the Bani Qurayzah. 

As to the relations between Quraysh and the tribes of Najd, there was 
little need for any action on the part of Nu‘aym. Nearly two weeks had 
passed and nothing had been achieved. The provisions of both their armies 
were running out, while more and more of their horses were dying every 
day, of hunger or of arrow wounds or of both. Some camels had also died. 
Nor could Quraysh fail to perceive that Ghatafan and the other Bedouin 
were at the best reluctant allies. They had taken part in the campaign far 
more in hopes of plunder than out of hostility to the new religion; and 
those hopes by which they had been lured to the Yathrib oasis had proved 
totally vain. Recriminations were on many tongues, and mutual distrust 
spread throughout the two invading armies. The expedition had virtually 
failed; and now the final seal of failure was placed upon it by Heaven. 

For three days, after the ritual prayer, the Prophet had uttered the 
supplication: “O God, Revealer of the Book, Swift Caller to account, turn 
the confederates to flight, turn them to flight and cause them to quake.” 1 

I.S.II/i, 53; W. 487. 



The Siege zzj 

And when all was over this verse was revealed: O ye who believe, 
remember God's favour unto you when hosts came at you and We sent 
against them a wind and hosts ye saw not. 1 

For days the weather had been exceptionally cold and wet; and now a 
piercing wind came from the east with torrents of rain which forced every 
man to take shelter. The night fell, and a tempest raged over the plain. The 
wind rose to hurricane force and what the wind did not accomplish was 
done by unseen hands. Throughout the two camps of the invaders there 
was soon not one tent left standing nor any fire left burning, and the men 
crouched shivering on the ground, huddled together for warmth. 

The Muslims’ camp was somewhat sheltered from the wind, which blew 
down none of their tents. But its bitterness filled the air, and together with 
the accumulated strain of the siege it reduced the believers to a weakness of 
soul that they would not have thought possible. The Prophet prayed late 
into the night; then he went among the men who happened to be nearest to 
his tent, and one of them, Hudhayfah the son of Yaman, told afterwards 
how they had heard him say: “Which of you will rise and go to see what the 
enemy are about and then return, and I will ask of God that he shall be my 
Companion in Paradise?” But there was no response. “We were so 
unnerved,” said Hudhayfah, “so cold and so hungry that not one man rose 
to his feet.” When it became clear that no one was intending to offer 
himself, the Prophet called to Hudhayfah, who rose and went to him, 
spurred into action by being singled out from the rest. “I could not but 
rise,” he said, “when 1 heard my name upon his lips.” “Go thou,” said the 
Prophet, “and enter in amongst the men and see what they are about; but 
do naught else until thou hast returned unto us.” “So I went,” said 
Hudhayfah, “and entered amongst the people while the wind and the hosts 
of God were doing their work against them.” He told how he made his way 
amongst the crouching figures of Quraysh- for it was to their camp that he 
had gone - until he came near to where their commander was seated. They 
spent the night benumbed with cold, and then towards dawn, when the 
wind began to abate, Abu Sufyan cried out in a loud voice: “Men of 
Quraysh, our horses and our camels are dying; the Bani Qurayzah have 
failed us, and we have been informed that they seek to betray us; and now 
we have suffered from the wind what your eyes behold. Therefore begone 
from this place, for I am going.” With these words he went to his camel and 
mounted it, so eager to set off that he forgot to untie its hobble, which he 
did only after he had forced it to rise on three legs. But ‘Ikrimah said to 
him: “Thou art the head of the people and their leader. Wilt thou be clear 
of us so hastily, and leave the men behind?” whereupon Abu Sufyan was 
ashamed, and making his camel kneel once more, he dismounted. The 
army broke camp and moved off, and he waited until most of them were on 
the homeward march. Then he set off himself, having agreed with Khalid 
and ‘Amr that they should bring up the rear with a detachment of two 
hundred horse. While they were waiting, Khalid said: “Every man of sense 
now knoweth that Muhammad hath not lied,” but Abu Sufyan cut him 
short saying: “Thou hast more right not to say so than any man else.” 
“Wherefore?” said Khalid. And he answered: “Because Muhammad 
1 XXXIII, 9. 



2.2.8 Muhammad 


belittled the honour of thy father, and slew the chief of thy clan, Abu Jahl.” 

As soon as Hudhayfah had heard the order to march he made his way to 
the camp of Ghatafan, but found the place deserted, for the wind had 
broken their resistance also and they were already on their way to Najd. So 
he returned to the Prophet, who was standing in prayer, cloaked against 
the cold in a wrapper belonging to one of his wives. “When he saw me,” 
said Hudhayfah, “he motioned me to sit beside him at his feet, and threw 
the end of the wrapper over me. Then, with me still in it, he made the 
bowing and the prostrations. When he had uttered the final greeting of 
peace, I told him the news.” 1 

Bilal made the call to the dawn prayer; and when they had prayed it, the 
half-light of the approaching day revealed the total emptiness of the plain 
beyond the trench. The Prophet gave out that every man had permission to 
return home, whereupon most of them set off at great speed for the town. 
Then, fearing that the confederates might have left some spies, or that Bani 
Qurayzah might be on the watch and that they might try to persuade the 
enemy to return, telling them that the trench was no longer guarded, he 
sent Jabir and ‘Umar’s son ‘Abd Allah in the wake of their departed 
comrades to call them back. They both went after them, shouting as hard 
as they could, but not one man so much as turned his head. Jabir followed 
the Bani Harithah all the way, and stood for a while shouting outside their 
houses, but no one came out to him. When he and ‘Abd Allah finally 
returned to the Prophet to tell him of their complete failure, he laughed and 
set out for the town himself with those of his Companions who had waited 
to escort him. 

1 1.1. 683-4; W. 488-90. 



LXI 

Bani Qurayzah 


T HEY had only a few hours to rest. When the noon prayer had been 
prayed Gabriel came to the Prophet. He was splendidly dressed, his 
turban rich with gold and silver brocade, and a cloth of brocaded 
velvet was thrown over the saddle of the mule he was riding. “Hast thou 
laid down thine arms, O Messenger of God?” he said. “The Angels have 
not laid down their arms, and I return this moment from pursuing the foe, 
naught else. Verily God in His might and His majesty commandeth thee, O 
Muhammad, that thou shouldst go against the sons of Qurayzah. I go to 
them even now, that I may cause their souls to quake.” 1 

The Prophet gave orders that none should pray the afternoon prayer 
until he had reached the Qurayzah territory. The banner was given to ‘All, 
and before sunset all the fortresses had been invested by the same army, 
three thousand strong, which had opposed Quraysh and their allies at the 
trench. 

For twenty-five nights they were besieged, and then they sent to the 
Prophet to ask him to let them consult Abu Lubabah. Like the Bani Nadir, 
they had long been allies of Aws, and Abu Lubabah had been one of their 
chief links with his tribe. The Prophet bade him go to them, and he was 
beset on his arrival by weeping women and children so that much of his 
sternness against the treacherous enemy was softened; and when the men 
asked him if they should submit to Muhammad he said “Yea”, but at the 
same time he pointed to his throat as much as to warn them that in his 
opinion submission meant slaughter. The gesture was in contradiction 
with his assent, and might have prolonged the siege still further; and no 
sooner had he made it than an overwhelming sense of guilt added itself to 
the guilt which he already felt in the depth of his soul on account of the 
palm-tree which he had refused to give to his orphan ward at the Prophet’s 
request. 2 “My two feet had not moved from where they were,” he said, 
“before I was aware that I had betrayed the Messenger for God.” His face 
changed colour and he recited the verse: Verily we are for God , and verily 
unto Him are we returning. “What aileth thee?” said Ka‘b. “I have 
betrayed God and His Messenger,” said Abu Lubabah, and as he went 
down from the upper room he put his hand to his beard, and it was wet 
with his tears. He could not bring himself to go out the way he had entered 
and to face his fellow Awsites and others who, as he knew, were waiting 
eagerly to hear his news and to escort him to the Prophet. So he passed 


1.1.684. 


See p. 169. 



230 Muhammad 

through a gate at the back of the fortress and was soon on his way to the 
city. He went straight to the Mosque, and bound himself to one of the 
pillars, saying: “I will not stir from this place until God relent unto me for 
what I did.” 

The Prophet was waiting for his return, and when he finally heard what 
had happened he said: “If he had come to me I would have prayed God to 
forgive him; but seeing that he hath done what he hath done, it is not for 
me to free him until God shall relent unto him.” 1 

He remained at the pillar for some ten or fifteen days. Before every 
prayer, or whenever it was necessary, his daughter would come to untie his 
bonds; then after he had prayed he would bid her bind him once more. Yet 
the grievousness of his plight was lessened on account of a dream he had 
had one night during the siege. He had felt himself to be embedded in a bog 
of foul slime out of which he could not pull himself until he almost died of 
the stench of it. Then he saw a flowing stream and he washed himself clean 
in it and the air about him was fragrant. When he woke he went to Abu 
Bakr to ask him what it could mean; and Abu Bakr told him that his body 
meant his soul and that he would enter into a state of soul which would 
oppress him sorely and that then he would be given relief from it; and 
during his days at the pillar he lived on the hope of that relief. 

As to the Bani Qurayzah, Ka‘b suggested to them that since many of 
them believed Muhammad to be a Prophet they should enter his religion 
and save their lives and their property. But they said that death was 
preferable, and that they would have nothing but the Torah and the law of 
Moses. So Ka‘b made other suggestions, putting before them other 
possibilities of action, but these also were unacceptable. Now there were 
three young men of the Bani Hadl - descendants, that is, of Qurayzah’s 
brother Hadl - who had been in the fortresses of their kinsmen throughout 
the siege, and they reiterated the first proposal that Ka‘b had made. In their 
boyhood they had known Ibn al-Hayyaban, the old Syrian Jew who had 
come to live amongst them, and they now repeated his words about the 
expected Prophet: “His hour is close upon you. Be ye the first to reach him, 
O Jews; for he will be sent to shed blood and to take captive the women 
and the children of those who oppose him. Let not that hold you back from 
him.” 2 But the only answer they received was “We will not forsake the 
Torah”, so the three youths went down from the fortress that night, and 
telling the Muslim guards of their intention to enter Islam, they pledged 
their allegiance to the Prophet. Of the Bani Qurayzah themselves only two 
followed their example. One of these, ‘Amr ibn Su‘da, had from the 
beginning refused to countenance the breaking of the pact with the 
Prophet and had formally dissociated himself from it. He now suggested 
that if they would not enter Islam they could offer to pay the Prophet 
tribute or a tax - “but by God, I know not if he would accept it”. They 
replied, however, that it was preferable to be killed than to agree to pay 
tribute to the Arabs. So he himself left the fortress, and having passed 
through the guards as a Muslim, he spent that night in the Mosque in 
Medina. But he was never seen again, and to this day it is not known 

1 W. 507. 2 I.I.136. 



Bani Qurayzah 231 

whither he went or where he died. The Prophet said of him: “That is a man 
whom God saved for his faithfulness.” The other man, Rifa‘ah ibn 
Samaw’al, eluded the guards and took refuge with Salma bint Qays, the 
Prophet’s maternal aunt, Aminah’s half-sister, who had married a Khazra- 
jite of the Bani an-Najjar. It was in her house that Rifa‘ah entered Islam. 

The next day, despite Abu Lubabah’s warning, the Bani Qurayzah 
opened the gates of their fortresses and submitted to the Prophet’s 
judgement. The men were led out with their hands bound behind their 
backs and a space was allotted them on one side of the camp. On another 
side the women and children were assembled, and the Prophet put them in 
the charge of ‘Abd Allah ibn Sallam, the former chief rabbi of the Bani 
Qaynuqa‘. The arms and armour, the garments and the household goods 
were collected from each fortress and all gathered together in one place. 
The jars of wine and fermented date juice were opened and their contents 
poured away. 

The clans of Aws sent a deputation to the Prophet asking him to show 
their former allies the same leniency that he had shown the Bani Qaynuqa‘ 
who had been the allies of Khazraj. He answered them saying: “Will it 
satisfy you, men of Aws, if one of yourselves pronounce judgement upon 
them?” And they agreed. So he sent to Medina for their chief, Sa‘d ibn 
Mu‘adh, whose wound had not healed and who was being cared for in a 
tent in the Mosque. The Prophet had placed him there so that he might visit 
him the more often, and Rufaydah, a woman of Aslam, was tending his 
wound. Some of his clansmen went to him, and mounting him on an ass 
they brought him to the camp. “Do well by thy confederates,” they said to 
him on the way, “for the Messenger of God hath set thee in judgement 
upon them for no other purpose than that thou mayst treat them with 
indulgence.” But Sa‘d was a man of justice; like ‘Umar he had been against 
sparing the prisoners at Badr, and their opinion had been confirmed by the 
Revelation. Many men of Quraysh who had been ransomed on that 
occasion had come out against them at Uhud and again at the trench; and 
in this last campaign the strength of the invaders had been largely due to 
the hostile activities of the exiled Jews of Bani Nadir. If these had been put 
to death instead of being allowed to go into exile, the invading army might 
have been halved, and Bani Qurayzah would no doubt have remained 
faithful to their pact with the Prophet. The arguments offered by past 
experience were not in favour of leniency, to say the least. Moreover, Sa‘d 
had himself been one of the envoys to Qurayzah at the moment of crisis 
and had seen the ugliness of their treachery when they had thought that the 
defeat of the Muslims was certain. It was true that if he gave a severe 
judgement most of the men and women of Aws would blame him, but that 
consideration would not have weighed much with Sa‘d at any time and 
now it weighed not at all, for he was convinced that he was dying. He cut 
short the pleas of his clansmen with the words: “The time hath come for 
Sa‘d, in the cause of God, to give no heed unto the blame of the blamer.” 

Sa‘d was a man of mighty stature, of handsome and majestic appear¬ 
ance, and when he came to the camp the Prophet said “Rise in honour of 
your liege lord,” and they rose to greet him saying: “Father of ‘Amr, the 
Messenger of God hath appointed thee to judge the case of thy confeder- 



Z3 z Muhammad 

ates.” He said: “Do ye then swear by God and make by Him your covenant 
that my judgement shall be the verdict upon them?” “We do,” they 
answered. “And is it binding upon him who is here?” he added, with a 
glance in the direction of the Prophet, but not mentioning him out of 
reverence. “It is,” said the Prophet. “Then I judge,” said Sa‘d, “that the 
men shall be slain, the property divided, and the women and children made 
captive.” 1 The Prophet said to him: “Thou hast judged with the judgement 
of God from above the seven heavens.” 

The women and children were taken away to the city where they were 
lodged, and the men spent the night in the camp where they recited the 
Torah and exhorted one another to firmness and patience. In the morning 
the Prophet ordered trenches, long and deep and narrow, to be dug in the 
market-place. The men, about seven hundred in all - according to some 
accounts more and to others less - were sent for in small groups, and every 
group was made to sit alongside the trench that was to be his grave. Then 
‘All and Zubayr and others of the younger Companions cut off their heads, 
each with a stroke of the sword. 

When Huyay was led into the market he turned to the Prophet, who was 
sitting apart with some of his older Companions, and said to him: “I blame 
not myself for having opposed thee, but whoso forsaketh God, the same 
shall be forsaken.” Then he turned to his fellows and said: “The command 
of God cannot be wrong - a writ and a decree and a massacre which God 
hath set down in his book against the sons of Israel.” Then he sat beside the 
trench and his head was cut off. 

The last to die were beheaded by torchlight. Then one old man, Zablr 
ibn Bata, whose case was not yet decided, was taken to the house where the 
women were lodged. The next morning, when they were told of the death 
of their men, the city was filled with the sound of their lamentations. But 
the aged Zablr quieted them, saying: “Be silent! Are ye the first women of 
the children of Israel to be made captive since the world began? Had there 
been any good in your men they would have saved you from this. But 
cleave ye to the religion of the Jews, for in that must we die, and in that 
must we live hereafter.” 

Zablr had always been an enemy to Islam and had done much to stir up 
opposition to the Prophet. But in the civil wars of Yathrib he had spared 
the life of a man of Khazraj, Thabit ibn Qays, who wished to repay him for 
this, and who had gone to the Prophet to ask him to let Zablr live. “He is 
thine,” said the Prophet; but when Zablr was told of his reprieve he said to 
Thabit: “An old man, without wife and without children, what will he do 
with life?” So Thabit went again to the Prophet, who gave him Zablr’s wife 
and children. But Zablr said: “A household in the Hijaz without property, 
how can they survive?” Again Thabit went to the Prophet, who gave him 
all Zabir’s possessions except his arms and armour. But thoughts of the 

1 Sa‘d’s judgement was no doubt directed mainly against their treachery; but in fact it 
coincided exactly with Jewish law as regards the treatment of a besieged city, even if it were 
innocent of treachery: When the Lord thy God hath delivered it unto thy hands, thou shalt 
smite every male therein with the edge of the sword: but the women, and the little ones, and 
the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself. 
Deuteronomy zo: iz. 



Bani Qurayzah 233 

death of all his fellow tribesmen now overwhelmed Zabir and he said: “By 
God I ask thee, Thabit, by the claim 1 have on thee, that thou shouldst join 
me with my people, for now that they are gone, there is no good in life.” At 
first Thabit refused, but when he saw that he was serious he took him to the 
place of execution and Zubayr was told to behead him. His wife and 
children were set free and their property was returned to them, under 
Thabit’s guardianship. 

As to the other women and children, they were divided, together with 
the property, amongst the men who had taken part in the siege. Many of 
these captives were ransomed by the Bani Nadir at Khaybar. As part of 
his share the Prophet had chosen Rayhanah, the daughter of Zayd, a 
Nadlrite, who had married her to a man of Qurayzah. She was a woman of 
great beauty and she remained the Prophet’s slave until she died some five 
years later. At first he put her in the care of his aunt Salma, in whose house 
Rifa‘ah had already taken refuge. Rayhanah herself was averse to entering 
Islam, but Rifa‘ah, and his kinsmen of the Bani Hadl spoke to her about the 
new religion and it was not long before one of the three young converts, 
Tha‘labah by name, came to the Prophet and told him that Rayhanah had 
entered Islam, whereupon he greatly rejoiced. When it became clear that 
she was not pregnant, he went to her and offered to set her free and to make 
her his wife. But she said: “O Messenger of God, leave me in thy power; 
that will be easier for me and for thee.” 



LXII 


After the Siege 


W HEN Sa‘d had passed judgement on Bani Qurayzah he returned 
to his sick-bed in the Mosque. He had already prayed that if God 
had any more fighting for him to accomplish against His enemies 
He would let him live, and if not that He would let him die; and now his 
condition grew rapidly worse. One night not long after the siege the 
Prophet found him apparently unconscious. He sat down at his head 
which he gently raised and laid against his breast, and then he prayed: “O 
Lord, verily Sa‘d hath striven upon the path, with fullness of faith in Thy 
messenger, leaving naught undone that was his to do. Take then unto 
Thyself his spirit with the best acceptance wherewith Thou takest the 
spirits of Thy creatures.” Sa‘d heard the Prophet’s voice, and opening his 
eyes he said: “Peace be on thee, O Messenger of God, I bear witness that 
thou hast delivered thy message.” An hour or two later, after the Prophet 
had returned home, Gabriel came to him and told him that Sa‘d was dead. 

When they carried his bier to the cemetery, the bearers were amazed at 
the lightness of their load, for Sa‘d was a heavy man, but when they 
mentioned this to the Prophet he said: “I saw the Angels carrying him.” 
They set down the bier at the edge of the grave and he led the funeral 
prayer, with a multitude of men and women praying behind him. Then 
when they lowered the body unto the grave the Prophet’s face turned 
suddenly pale and he said three times Subhan Allah , “Glory be to God!”, 
this being an affirmation of the Absolute Transcendence of God, some¬ 
times uttered, as now, with reference to a limit that needs to be trans¬ 
cended. All those who were present repeated it and the cemetery resounded 
with the glorifications. Then after a moment he gave utterance to the 
words of victory, Allahu Akbar , “God is most Great”, and the cemetery 
resounded again as the magnification was likewise taken up by those who 
were present. Afterwards, when asked why he had changed colour, the 
Prophet said: “The grave closed in upon your companion, and he felt a 
constriction which, if any man could escape it, Sa‘d would have escaped. 
Then God gave him blissful relief.” 1 

It was at the dawn of one of the days which followed, when the Prophet 
was in the apartment of Umm Salamah, that he announced to her: “Abu 
Lubabah is forgiven.” “May I not give him the good tidings?” she said. “If 
thou wilt,” he answered, so she stood at the door of her apartment which 
opened into the Mosque, not far from the pillar to which he had bound 


1 W. 519 



After the Siege Z3 5 

himself, and called out: “O Abu Lubabah, be of good cheer, for God hath 
relented unto thee.” The men who were in the Mosque surged upon him 
to set him free, but he stopped them saying: “Not until the Messenger of 
God set me free with his own hands.” So the Prophet passed by him on 
his way to the prayer and loosed his bonds. 

After the prayer Abu Lubabah came to the Prophet and said that he 
wished to make an offering in expiation of what he had done, and the 
Prophet accepted from him a third of his property, for the Revelation 
which had set him free had said: Take alms of their wealth to purify themf 
the reference being not only to Abu Lubabah but also to other good men at 
fault who freely admitted that they were wrong. 

About five months after the campaign of the Trench, the Prophet heard 
that a rich caravan of Quraysh was on its way from Syria, and Zayd was 
sent to waylay it with a troop of a hundred and seventy horse. They 
captured the entire merchandise, including much silver which was the 
property of Safwan, and most of the men were taken captive. Amongst the 
few who escaped was Abu l‘As, the Prophet’s son-in-law; and as he 
approached Medina, near which he was bound to pass on his way to 
Mecca, he was filled with longing to see his wife and their little daughter 
Umamah. Under cover of night he entered the city at considerable risk and 
was somehow able to find where Zaynab lived. He knocked at the door 
and she opened it and let him in. It was not far from daybreak, and when 
Bilal made the call to the prayer Zaynab left him in the house with 
Umamah and went to the Mosque to take her place as usual with her sisters 
and stepmothers in the front rank of the women, behind the ranks of the 
men. The Prophet made the initial magnification which the men repeated 
after him; and in the brief moment of silence which ensued Zaynab cried 
out with all the strength of her voice: “O people, I give protection to Abu 
l-‘As the son of RabP.” Then she entered the prayer herself with the 
magnification. 

When the Prophet had pronounced the final greeting of Peace, he rose 
and turned to face the congregation saying “Did ye hear what I heard?”, 
and there was a murmur of affirmation throughout the Mosque. “By him 
in whose hand is my soul,” he said, “I knew naught of this until I heard 
what I heard. The meanest Muslim can grant protection which shall be 
binding on all other Muslims.” Then he went to his daughter and said: 
“Receive him with all honour, but let him not come unto thee as a 
husband, for thou art not his by law.” She told her father that Abu l- 4 As 
was troubled by the loss of the merchandise which he himself had acquired 
by barter in Syria on behalf of various men of Quraysh who had entrusted 
their goods to him, for he was one of the most trusted men of Mecca. So the 
Prophet sent word to those of the expedition who had taken the property 
of Abu l-‘As: “This man is related to us as ye know, and ye have taken 
property of his. If ye should be so good as to return it unto him, that would 
please me; but if ye will not, it is booty which God hath given you, so that 
yours is the better right to it.” They said they would give it back to him, and 


1 IX, 103. 



z $6 Muhammad 

they even went so far as to return old water-skins, small leather bottles and 
pieces of wood. Everything was returned to him without exception; and 
since there were signs that he had thoughts of entering Islam, one of the 
men said to him: “Why dost thou not enter Islam and take these goods 
unto thyself, for they are the property of idolaters?” But he answered: “It 
were a bad beginning to my Islam, that I should betray my trust.” He took 
the goods to Mecca and gave them to their owners. Then he returned to 
Medina and entered Islam, pledging his allegiance. So Zaynab was united 
once more with her husband, and there was great rejoicing in the family of 
the Prophet and throughout the city. 



LXIII 

The Hypocrites 

Z A YD’S successful ambush on the eastern caravan route turned the 
thoughts of Quraysh once more to the western route which they so 
much preferred; and they now stirred up their own Red Sea coast 
allies, the Bani 1 -Mustaliq, a clan of Khuza‘ah, to make a raid on Medina, 
hoping no doubt that the raiders might gather support from other coastal 
tribes, and thus open up the way once more for themselves. But the other 
clans of Khuza‘ah were more favourably disposed to the Prophet than the 
Meccans realised, and news of this project reached him in good time. He 
was thus given the opportunity to demonstrate his undiminished and even 
increased power along the western route also, to within a few marches 
from Mecca itself. After eight days, considerably before the Bani 1 -Mus- 
taliq were prepared to set out, he was already encamped on their territory 
at one of their watering places. From there he advanced and by a quick 
manoeuvre was able to close in upon the tent-dwellers, who surrendered 
without much resistance. Only one Muslim was killed, and of the enemy 
no more than ten. About two hundred families were made captive, and the 
booty included some two thousand camels and five thousand sheep and 
goats. 

The army camped there for a few more days, but its stay was cut short by 
an untoward incident. A quarrel broke out at one of the wells between two 
coastal tribesmen, from Ghifar and Juhaynah, as to which bucket be¬ 
longed to which, and they fell to fighting. The Ghifarite, whom ‘Umar had 
hired to lead his horse, shouted for help - “O Quraysh” - while the Ju- 
haynite called on his traditional allies of Khazraj, and the more hotheaded 
of both Emigrants and Helpers rushed to the scene. Swords were drawn 
and blood might have been shed had not some of the closer Companions 
intervened on both sides. This would normally have been the end of the 
matter. But it so happened that more of the hypocrites than usual had 
taken part in this expedition; it was in familiar and well-watered territory, 
and from the outset there had been hope of an easy victory and spoils well 
worth the effort. They were not, however, prepared to change their point 
of view but still persisted in looking on the expeditions which set out from 
Yathrib as forays of Khazraj and Aws supplemented by auxiliaries. It was 
therefore to the sons of Qaylah that the camp belonged: the Quraysh 
refugees were there, as elsewhere, merely on sufferance. In this frame of 
mind Ibn Ubayy was sitting apart with a group of his intimates when the 
sound of the quarrel came to their ears, and one of them went to see what 
was the matter. He returned to report, quite truly, that ‘Umar’s man had 



238 Muhammad 

been entirely to blame, and that it was he who had struck the first blow. 
This served to fan afresh the embers of bitterness which were still 
smouldering from the ordeal of the Trench. For the last five years the 
tension had gradually mounted until the presence of Muhammad and the 
other Emigrants had brought the whole of Arabia against them. Added to 
this, the rich and hospitable Jewish tribes which had played so important a 
part in the community had been rooted out - two of them exiled and the 
third massacred. The civil wars of the oasis had indeed called for a 
solution, but Ibn Ubayy was convinced that if he had been made king he 
would have known how to put an end to the discord without involving his 
people in more dangerous hostilities. And now these impoverished refu¬ 
gees had had the effrontry to obstruct the passage of their benefactors to 
the well! “Have they gone so far as this?” said Ibn Ubayy. “They seek to 
take precedence over us, they crowd us out of our own country, and 
naught will fit us and these rags of Quraysh but the old saying ‘Feed fat thy 
dog and it will feed on thee.’ By God, when we return to Medina, the 
higher and the mightier of us will drive out the lower and the weaker.” A 
boy of Khazraj named Zayd, who was sitting at the edge of the circle, went 
straight to the Prophet and told him what Ibn Ubayy had said. The Prophet 
changed colour, and ‘Umar, who was with him, suggested that he should 
forthwith have the traitor beheaded, but he said: “What if men should say, 
O ‘Umar, that Muhammad slayeth his companions?” Meantime one of the 
Helpers had gone to Ibn Ubayy and asked him if he had in fact said what 
the boy had reported, and Ibn Ubayy came straight to the Prophet and 
swore that he had said no such thing. Some of the men of Khazraj who 
were present also spoke in his defence, anxious to avoid trouble. The 
Prophet let it seem as if the incident were closed; but a surer way of 
avoiding trouble was to busy men’s minds with something else and he gave 
the order to break camp immediately. 

Never before had he been known to move off at that hour: it was not 
long after midday; and with brief halts at the times of prayer they were 
kept on the march through the heat of the afternoon, then all through the 
night and from dawn until the heat of the next day became oppressive. 
When they were finally told to pitch camp, the men were too tired to do 
anything but sleep. During the march the Prophet confided to Sa‘d ibn 
‘Ubadah, who for the Muslims had been gradually replacing Ibn Ubayy as 
the chief man of Khazraj, that he believed young Zayd to have spoken the 
truth. “O Messenger of God,” said Sa‘d, “thou, if thou wilt, shalt drive out 
him, for he is the lower and the weaker and thou art the higher and the 
mightier.” He asked him none the less to deal gently with Ibn Ubayy, nor 
was the Prophet intending to mention the incident again; but soon after his 
talk with Sa‘d the matter was taken out of his hands, for the Revelation 
descended upon him and that chapter was revealed which is named the 
Surah of the Hypocrites, one of whom it quotes, though not by name, as 
having said the very words spoken by Zayd. The Prophet did not however 
give out this chapter until they had returned to Medina. But he rode up to 
Zayd and leaning towards him took hold of his ear. “Boy,” he said, “thine 
ear heard truly, and God hath confirmed thy speech.” 

Meantime ‘Abd Allah, the son of Ibn Ubayy, was deeply distressed for he 


The Hypocrites 239 

knew that his father had spoken those words. He had also been told that 
‘Umar had wanted the Prophet to put his father to death, and he was afraid 
that the sentence might be passed and the order given at any moment. So he 
went to the Prophet and said: “O Messenger of God, I am told that thou art 
minded to slay ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy. If thou must needs do it, then give me 
the order, and I will bring thee his head. Khazraj know full well that there is 
no man amongst them of more filial piety unto his father than myself, and I 
fear that if thou shouldst give the order unto another my soul would not 
suffer me to look upon the slayer of my father walking amongst men, but I 
would slay him, and having thus slain a believer on behalf of a disbeliever I 
would enter the fire of Hell.” But the Prophet said: “Nay, but let us deal 
gently with him and make the best of his companionship so long as he be 
with us.” 1 


1 I.I.716-8. 



LXIV 


The Necklace 


A SHAH and Umm Salamah had accompanied the Prophet on this 
expedition; and at a sunset halt two or three days after the forced 
march, an onyx necklace which ‘A’ishah was wearing came 
unclasped and slipped to the ground unobserved. When she noticed her 
loss, it was already too dark to make a search, and she was loath to go 
without it. Her mother had placed it round her neck on the day of her 
wedding, and it was one of her most treasured possessions. The place was 
without water and the Prophet had intended no more than a brief halt, but 
he now gave orders to camp there until daylight. The reason for the change 
of plan was passed from mouth to mouth, and much indignation was felt 
that a whole army should be kept waiting at such an inclement spot for the 
sake of a necklace. Some of the Companions went and complained to Abu 
Bakr, who was greatly embarrassed and scolded his daughter for her 
carelessness. There was not one well within reach, and the men had used 
up all the water they carried with them, intending to fill their skins and 
bottles at the well watered camp they had been aiming for. It would not be 
possible to pray at dawn, for they had no means of making their ablutions. 
But in the last hours of the night the verse of earth-purification was 
revealed to the Prophet - an event of untold importance for the practical 
life of the community: If ye find not water then purify yourselves with 
clean earth, wiping therewith your faces and your hands . 1 The feelings that 
had run so high throughout the host subsided, and Usayd exclaimed: “This 
is not the first blessing that ye have brought unto us, O family of Abu 
Bakr.” 

When daylight came, the necklace was still nowhere to be seen; but 
when all hopes of finding it were lost and they were preparing to set off 
without it, ‘A’ishah’s camel rose from where he had been kneeling all 
night, and there was the necklace on the ground beneath him. 

One of the next camps was in a pleasant valley, with long stretches of 
level sand. The Prophet’s two tents were pitched as usual somewhat apart 
from the others, and that day it was ‘A’ishah’s turn to be with him. She 
recounted afterwards how he had suggested that they should have a race. 
“I girded up my robe about me,” she said, “and the Prophet did likewise. 
Then we raced, and he won the race. ‘This is for that other race’, he said, 
‘which thou didst win from me.’ ” He was referring to an incident which 
had taken place in Mecca, before the Hijrah. ‘A’ishah added, by way of 


1 IV, 43. 


The Necklace 2.41 

explanation? “He had come to my father’s house and I had something in 
my hand and he said: ‘Bring it here to me’, and I would not, and ran away 
from him, and he ran after me, but I was too quick for him.” 1 

The clasp of ‘A’ishah’s necklace was insecure, and at one of the last halts 
before they reached Medina it slipped from her neck again. This was when 
the order to march had already been given and she had withdrawn from 
the camp to satisfy a call of nature. On her return, she and Umm Salamah 
seated themselves in their respective howdahs, closed the curtains and 
unveiled their faces. Only then did ‘A’ishah realise her loss; and slipping 
out from under the curtain she went back to look for it. Meantime the men 
had saddled the camels, and led them to the howdahs which they strapped 
each upon its mount. They were accustomed to a considerable difference in 
weight between them - that of a thirty-year-old woman as compared with 
one of fourteen who was slight for her age — and they failed to notice that 
this time the lighter of the two howdahs was even lighter than usual, so 
they led away the camels to join the march without a second thought. “I 
found my necklace,” said ‘A’ishah, “and returned to the camp and not a 
soul was there. So I went to where my howdah had been, thinking that they 
would miss me and come back for me, and whilst I sat there mine eyes were 
overcome with heaviness and I fell asleep. I was lying there when Safwan 2 
the son of Mu‘attal passed by. He had fallen behind the army for some 
reason and had not slept at the camp. Noticing me, he came and stood over 
me. He had been used to seeing me before the veil was imposed upon us, 
and when he recognised me he said: ‘ Verily we are for God, and verily unto 
Him we are returning. This is the wife of the Messenger of God.”’ His 
utterance of the verse of return woke her up; and she drew her veil over her 
face. Safwan offered her his camel and escorted her himself on foot to the 
next halt. 3 

On the army’s arrival there, ‘A’ishah’s howdah had been lifted from its 
mount and placed on the ground; and when she did not emerge from it they 
assumed that she was asleep. Great was the astonishment when, towards 
the end of the halt, after the men had rested, she rode into the camp led by 
Safwan. That was the beginning of a scandal which was to shake Medina, 
and the tongues of the hypocrites were not slow in starting it, but for the 
moment the Prophet and ‘A’ishah and most of the Companions were quite 
unaware of the impending trouble. 

The spoils were divided as usual, and one of the captives was Juwayriyah, 
the daughter of Harith, chief of the defeated clan. She fell to the lot of a 
Helper who fixed a high price for her ransom, and she came to the Prophet 
to ask for his intervention on her behalf. He was on that day in the 
apartment of ‘A’ishah, who opened the door to her, and who said 
afterwards, recounting what had taken place: “She was a woman of great 
loveliness and beauty. No man looked on her but she captivated his soul, 
and when I saw her at the door of my room I was filled with misgivings, for 

1 W.427. 

2 A young man of the Bani Sulaym who had come to live in Medina and was thus counted 
as one of the Emigrants. 

2 1 . 1 . 732; B. LU, 15; W. 426-8. 



242 Muhammad 

I knew that the Prophet would see in her what I saw. She entered unto him 
and said: ‘O Messenger of God, I am Juwayriyyah, the daughter of Harith, 
the lord of his people. Well thou knowest the distress that hath fallen upon 
me, and I have come to seek thy help in the matter of my ransom.’ He 
answered: ‘Wouldst thou have better than that?’ ‘What is better?’ she 
asked, and he answered: ‘That I should pay thy ransom and marry thee.’ 

Juwayriyyah gladly accepted his offer, but the marriage had not yet 
taken place when her father arrived with some camels for her ransom. 
They were not the full number he had originally intended to offer, for in the 
valley of ‘Aqlq, shortly before reaching the oasis, he had taken a last look 
at the fine animals and had been so smitten with admiration for two of 
them that he had separated them from the others and hidden them in one of 
the passes of the valley, unable to bring himself to part with them. The 
remainder he took to the Prophet and said: “O Muhammad, thou hast 
captured my daughter and here is her ransom.” “But where,” said the 
Prophet, “are those two camels which thou didst hide in ‘Aqlq?” And he 
went on to describe in exact detail the pass in which they were tethered. 
Then Harith said: “I testify that there is no god but God, and that thou, 
Muhammad, art the Messenger of God”; and two of his sons entered Islam 
with him. He sent for the two camels and gave them with the rest to the 
Prophet, who restored his daughter to him. Then she herself entered Islam, 
and the Prophet asked her father to give her to him in marriage, which he 
did; 2 and an apartment was built for her. 

When it became known that the Bani Mustaliq were now the Prophet’s 
kinsmen by marriage, the Emigrants and Helpers set free their captives 
who had not yet been ransomed. About a hundred families were released. 
“I know of no woman,” said ‘A’ishah, referring to Juwayriyyah, “who was 
a greater blessing to her people than she.” 3 


’ I.1. 72.9. 


2 LH.719. 


3 I.I. ibid. 


LXV 


The Lie 


N OT long after her return to Medina, ‘A’ishah fell ill. By that time 
the slander that the hypocrites had whispered against herself and 
Safwan was being repeated throughout the city. Few took it 
seriously, though amongst those who did was her own cousin Mistah, of 
the clan of Muttalib. But whether they believed it or not, everyone knew of 
it, except herself. She was none the less conscious of a certain reserve on the 
part of the Prophet, and she missed the loving attention which he had 
shown her in her other illnesses. He would come into the room and say to 
those who were nursing her “How are ye all today?”, simply including her 
with the others. Deeply wounded, but too proud to complain, she asked his 
permission to go to her parents’ house where her mother could nurse her. 
“As thou wilt,” he said. 

To recount what took place in ‘A’ishah’s own words: “I went to my 
mother without any knowledge of what was being said, and recovered 
from my illness some twenty days later. Then one evening I went out with 
the mother of Mistah - her mother was the sister of my father’s mother - 
and as she was walking beside me she stumbled over her gown and 
exclaimed: ‘May Mistah stumble!’ ‘God’s Life,’ I said, ‘that was an ill thing 
to say of a man of the Emigrants who fought at Badr!’ ‘O daughter of Abu 
Bakr,’ she said, ‘can it be that the news hath not reached thee?’ ‘What 
news?’ I said. Then she told me what the slanderers had said and how 
people were repeating it. ‘Can this be so?’ I said. ‘By God, it is indeed!’ was 
her answer, and I returned home in tears, and I wept and wept until I 
thought that my weeping would split my liver. ‘God forgive thee!’ I said to 
my mother. ‘People talk their talk, and thou tellest me not one word of it!’ 
‘My little daughter,’ she said, ‘take it not so heavily, for there is seldom a 
beautiful woman married to a man who loveth her but her fellow wives are 
full of gossip about her, and others repeat what they say.’ So I lay awake 
the whole of that night, and my tears flowed without ceasing.”' 

But in fact, whatever jealousies there may have been between one and 
another, the wives of the Prophet were all women of piety, and not one of 
them took any part in spreading the slander. On the contrary, they 
defended ‘A’ishah and spoke well of her. Of those chiefly to blame, the 
nearest to the Prophet’s household was his cousin Hamnah, Zaynab’s 
sister, who repeated the calumny, thinking thus to further her sister’s 
interests: for it was generally thought that but for ‘A’ishah Zaynab would 


1 B. LII, 15. 


144 Muhammad 

have been the Prophet’s favourite wife; and Zaynab suffered much from 
her sister’s ill conceived zeal on her behalf. Another of the slanderers, in 
addition to Mistah, was the poet Hassan ibn Thabit; and in the back¬ 
ground were Ibn Ubayy and the other hypocrites who had started every¬ 
thing. 

The Prophet clearly hoped for a Revelation, but when nothing came he 
questioned not only his wives but also other near ones. Usamah, who was 
the same age as ‘A ishah, spoke vigorously in her defence. “This is all a lie,” 
he said. “We know naught but good of her.” His mother, Umm Ayman, 
was equally emphatic in praise of her. As for ‘AH, he said: “God hath not 
restricted thee, and there are many women besides her. But question her 
maidservant and she will tell thee the truth.” So the Prophet sent for her 
and said: “O Burayrah, hast thou ever seen aught in ‘A’ishah that might 
make thee suspect her?” She answered: “By Him that sent thee with the 
truth, I know only good of her; and if it were otherwise God would inform 
His Messenger. I have no fault to find with ‘A’ishah but that she is a girl, 
young in years, and when I am kneeding dough and I bid her watch it she 
will fall asleep and her pet lamb will come and eat it. I have blamed her for 
that more than once.” 

When next the Prophet went to the Mosque he ascended the pulpit, and 
having praised God he said: “O people, what say ye of men who injure me 
with regard to my family, reporting of them what is not true? By God, I 
know naught but good of my household, and naught but good of the man 
they speak of, who never entereth a house of mine but I am with him.” No 
sooner had he spoken than Usayd rose to his feet and said: “O Messenger 
of God, if they are of Aws we will deal with them; and if they be of our 
brethren of Khazraj then give us thy command, for they deserve that their 
heads should be cut off.” Before he had finished Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah was 
already on his feet, for Hassan was of Khazraj, and so were the men who 
had subtly hatched the slander in the beginning. “God’s Life, thou liest!” 
he said. “Ye shall not slay them, nor can ye. Neither wouldst thou have 
spoken thus, had they been of thy people.” “God’s Life, liar thyself!” said 
Usayd. “Slay them we shall, and thou art a hypocrite, striving on behalf of 
hypocrites.” By this time the two tribes were about to come to grips with 
one another, but the Prophet motioned them to desist, and descending 
from the pulpit he quietened them and sent them away in peace. 

If ‘A’ishah had known that the Prophet had defended her in public from 
the pulpit, she would no doubt have been greatly comforted. But she knew 
nothing of it at the time. She was only aware of his questioning others 
about her, which suggested that he did not know what to think, and this 
greatly distressed her. She did not expect him, of himself, to look into her 
soul, for she knew that his knowledge of hidden things came to him from 
the next world. “I only kr».ow what God giveth me to know,” he would say. 
He did not seek to read the thoughts of men; but she expected him to know 
that her devotion to him was such as to make the thing she was accused of 
impossible. 

In any case, it was not enough that he should himself believe ‘A’ishah 
and Safwan to be innocent. The situation was a grave one, and it was 
imperative to have evidence which would convince the whole community. 



The Lie 245 

To this end ‘A’ishah herself had proved the least helpful of all concerned. It 
was now time that her silence should be broken. Not that anything she said 
could be enough to resolve the crisis. But the Koran promised that 
questions asked during the period of its revelation would be answered. 1 In 
the present case the Prophet had filled the air with questions - the same 
question, reiterated to different persons - but for the promised answer to 
be given by Heaven, it was perhaps necessary that the question should 
already have been put to the person most closely involved. 

“I was with my parents,” said ‘A’ishah, “and I had wept for two nights 
and a day; and while they were sitting with me a woman from the Helpers 
asked if she could join us, and I bade her enter, and she sat and wept with 
me. Then the Prophet entered and took his seat, nor had he sat with me 
since people began to say what they said of me. A month had passed, and 
no tidings had come to him about me from Heaven. After uttering the 
testification there is no god but God, he said: ‘O ‘A’ishah, I have been told 
such and such a thing concerning thee, and if thou art innocent, surely God 
will declare thine innocence; and if thou hast done aught that is wrong, 
then ask forgiveness of God and repent unto Him; for verily if the slave 
confess his sin and then repent, God relenteth unto him.’ No sooner had he 
spoken than my tears ceased to flow and I said to my father ‘Answer the 
Messenger of God for me,’ and he said: ‘I know not what to say.’ When I 
asked my mother she said the same, and I was no more than a girl, young in 
years, and there was not much of the Koran that I could recite. So I said: ‘I 
know well that ye have heard what men are saying, and it hath settled in 
your souls and ye have believed it; and if I say unto you that I am innocent— 
and God knoweth that I am innocent — ye will not believe me, whereas if I 
confessed to that which God knoweth 1 am guiltless of, ye would believe 
me.’ Then I groped in my mind for the name of Jacob, but I could not 
remember it, so I said: ‘But I will say as the father of Joseph said: Beautiful 
patience must be mine; and God is He of whom help is to be asked against 
what they say . 1 Then I turned to my couch and lay on it, hoping that God 
would declare me innocent. Not that I thought He would send down a 
Revelation on my account, for it seemed to me that I was too paltry for my 
case to be spoken of in the Koran. But I was hoping that the Prophet would 
see in his sleep a vision that would exculpate me. 

“He remained sitting in our company and all of us were still present 
when a Revelation came to him: he was seized with the pangs which seized 
him at such times, and as it were pearls of sweat dripped from him, 
although it was a wintry day. Then, when he was relieved of the pressure, 
he said in a voice that vibrated with gladness: ‘O ‘A’ishah, praise God, for 
He hath declared thee innocent.’ Then my mother said ‘Arise and go to the 
Messenger of God,’ and I said: ‘Nay by God, I will not rise and go to him, 
and I will praise none but God.’ ” 3 

The words of exculpation were: Verily they who brought forth the lie 
are a party amongst you .. . When ye took it upon your tongues, uttering 
with your mouths that whereof ye had no knowledge, ye counted it but a 
trifle. Yet in the sight of God it is enormous. Why said ye not when ye heard 


V, 101. 


2 XII, 18. 


1 B.LII, 15. 



Z46 Muhammad 

it: To speak of this is not for us. Glory be to Thee! This is a monstrous 
calumny. God biddeth you beware of ever repeating the like thereof, if ye 
are believers.' 

The new Revelation also dwelt upon the whole question of adultery, 
and, while prescribing the penalty, it likewise prescribed, as the penalty for 
slandering honourable women, that the slanderers should be scourged. 
This sentence was carried out upon Mistafr and Hassan and Hamnah, who 
had been most explicit in spreading the calumny and who confessed their 
guilt. But the hypocrites, who had been more insidious, had none the less 
been only implicit, nor did they confess to having had any part in it, so the 
Prophet preferred not to pursue the matter, but to leave them to God. 

Abu Bakr had been in the habit of giving his kinsman Mistah an 
allowance of money on account of his poverty, but now he said: “Never 
again by God will I give unto Mistah, and never again will I show him 
favour, after what he hath said against ‘A’ishah, and after the woe he hath 
brought upon us.” But there now came the Revelation: Let not the men of 
dignity and wealth amongst you swear that they will not give unto kinsmen 
and unto the needy and unto those who have migrated for the sake of God. 
Let them forgive and let them be indulgent. Do ye not long that God 
should forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Merciful. 2 Then Abu Bakr said: 
“Indeed I long that God shall forgive me,” And he returned to Mistah and 
gave him what he had been used to giving him and said: “I swear I will 
never withdraw it from him!” The Prophet likewise, after a certain time 
had elapsed, showed great generosity to Hassan; and he married his cousin 
Hamnah, Mus‘ab*s widow, to Talhah, by whom she had two sons. 


XXIV, ii, 15-17. 


2 XXIV, XX. 


LXVI 


The Dilemma of 
Quraysh 

T HE Prophet fasted Ramadan in Medina and remained there also 
during the month which followed. One night towards its end he 
dreamed that with his head shaved he entered the Ka‘bah, and its 
key was in his hand. The next day he told his Companions of this and 
invited them to perform the Lesser Pilgrimage with him, whereupon they 
hastily set about making preparations so that they could leave as soon as 
possible. Between them they purchased seventy camels to be sacrificed in 
the sacred precinct. Their meat would then be distributed among the poor 
of Mecca. The Prophet decided to take one of his wives with him, and 
when lots were cast the lot fell to Umm Salamah. Also amongst the 
pilgrims were the two women of Khazraj who had been present at the 
Second ‘Aqabah, Nusaybah and Umm Mani‘. 

Each man took with him a sword, and what might be needed for 
hunting, but before they set off ‘Umar and Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah suggested that 
they should go fully armed. Quraysh, they said, might well take the 
opportunity of attacking them, despite the sacred month. But the Prophet 
refused, saying: “1 will not carry arms; I have come forth for no end other 
than to make the Pilgrimage.” At the first halt he called for the sacrificial 
camels to be brought to him, and he himself consecrated one of them, 
turning it to face towards Mecca, making a mark on its right flank, and 
placing garlands round its neck, after which he ordered that the others 
should be consecrated in the same way. He then sent on ahead a man of 
Khuza‘ah, of the clan of Ka‘b, to bring him back word of the reactions of 
Quraysh. 

The Prophet was bareheaded and had already donned the age-old 
traditional pilgrim’s dress of two pieces of unstitched cloth, one girt round 
the waist to cover the lower part of the body, and the other draped round 
the shoulders. He now consecrated himself for the Pilgrimage with two 
prayer cycles, after which he began to utter the pilgrim’s cry Labbayk 
Allahumma Labbayk , which means “Here I am at Thy service, O God.” 
Most of the others followed his example, but a few preferred to wait until 
they had advanced somewhat further upon their journey, for the pilgrimal 
state carried with it certain restrictions about hunting. 



2,48 Muhammad 

When Quraysh heard of the departure of the pilgrims from Medina, they 
were filled with misgivings, as the Prophet had anticipated, and they 
immediately summoned a meeting in the Assembly. Never had they known 
a more serious dilemma. If they, the guardians of the sanctuary, were to 
hinder the approach of over a thousand Arab pilgrims to the Holy House, 
this would be a most flagrant violation of the laws on which all their own 
greatness was founded. On the other hand, if they allowed their enemies to 
enter Mecca in peace and comfort, it would be an immense moral triumph 
for Muhammad. The tidings of it would spread throughout Arabia and be 
on everybody’s lips; and it would serve to place the crown of defeat upon 
their own recent unsuccessful attack upon Medina. Perhaps worst of all, 
these pilgrims’ performances of the ancient rites would serve to make the 
new faith more attractive and to confirm its claim to be the religion of 
Abraham. All things considered, it was out of the question to let them 
come. “By God, this shall not be,” they said, “so long as there is a single eye 
amongst us with a glimmer of life left in it.” 

When the pilgrims reached ‘Usfan, the scout who had been sent on 
ahead rejoined them with the news that Quraysh had sent Khalid with a 
troop of two hundred horse to bar their approach. So the Prophet asked for 
a guide who could take them on by another way, and a man of Aslam led 
them a little towards the coast and then by a devious and difficult path until 
they reached the pass which leads down to Hudaybiyah, an open tract of 
land below Mecca at the edge of the sacred territory. Their detour had kept 
them well out of sight of Khalid, but at one point, when it was too late for 
him to take up another position, they raised so much dust that he realised 
what had happened, and galloped back to Mecca with his troop to warn 
Quraysh of their approach. 

The Prophet had chosen his favourite camel, Qaswa’, for the Pilgrimage, 
and at the end of the pass she stopped and knelt. The rocks resounded as 
many of the men cried out Hal! Hal!, which is what they say to make a 
camel rise, but she remained as if rooted to the earth. “Qaswa’ is 
stubborn,” they said, but the Prophet knew well that it was a sign that they 
should go no further than Hudaybiyah, at any rate for the moment. “She is 
not stubborn,” he said, “it is not in her nature; but He holdeth her who 
held the elephant.” He added, referring to Quraysh: “They shall not ask of 
me this day any concession which honoureth the rights of God but I will 
grant it them.” 1 Then he spoke to Qaswa’, and she quickly rose to her feet 
and bore him down to the edge of Hudaybiyah, followed by the other 
pilgrims. Here he told them to camp; but there was almost no water, only 
the dregs of it at the bottom of one or two hollows, and the men were 
complaining of thirst. The Prophet called Najiyah to him, the man of 
Aslam who was in charge of the sacrificial camels, and told him to bring 
him a pail of as much water as he could from the largest of the hollows, 
which he did. Having performed his ablution, the Prophet rinsed his 
mouth and spat back the water into the pail. Then, taking an arrow from 
his quiver, he said: “Go down with this water and pour it into the waters of 
the hollow; then stir them with this arrow.” Najiyah did as he was bid, and 

1 I.1.741; w. f8 7 . 



The Dilemma of Quraysh 24 9 

water, clear and fresh, surged up so quickly and so plentifully at the touch 
of the arrow that he was almost overwhelmed before he could clamber out. 
The pilgrims gathered round the edge of the hollow and every man drank 
his fill, as did also the animals. 

One or two of the hypocrites, were amongst the pilgrims, including Ibn 
Ubayy; and, as he sat drinking his fill, one of his fellow clansmen addressed 
him saying: “Out upon thee, O father of Hubab, hath not the time now 
come for thee to see how thou art placed? What more than this can there 
be?” “I have seen the like of this before,” said Ibn Ubayy, whereupon the 
other man remonstrated with him so threateningly that Ibn Ubayy went 
with his son to the Prophet to forestall trouble and to say that he had been 
misunderstood. But before he had time to speak the Prophet said to him: 
“Where hast thou seen the like of that which thou hast seen this day?” He 
answered: “I have never seen the like of it.” “Then why,” said the Prophet, 
“didst say what thou saidst?” “I ask forgiveness of God,” said Ibn Ubayy. 
“O Messenger of God,” said his son, “ask forgiveness for him,” and the 
Prophet did so. 1 

Having satisfied their thirst, the pilgrims were soon able also to eat their 
fill, thanks to a gift of camels and sheep from two Bedouin chiefs, whose 
tribe, the Bani Khuza‘ah, one-time guardians of the Sanctuary, included 
the clans of Aslam, Ka‘b and Mustaliq. To a man, these were now all well 
disposed towards the Prophet. For such of them as had not yet entered 
Islam, there was a political advantage in this alliance, which was needed to 
counterbalance the pact that their great enemies, the Bani Bakr, had long 
had with Quraysh. This situation was soon to give rise to events of the 
greatest importance. For the moment, however, there was no fighting 
between Khuza‘ah and Bakr, and Khuza‘ah were tolerated by Quraysh, 
but at the same time suspected. One of their leading men, Budayl ibn 
Warqa’, was in Mecca when news came that the pilgrims Were encamped 
at Hudaybiyah. He now went with some of his clansmen to the Prophet to 
inform him of the attitude of Quraysh. “They swear by God,” he said, 
“that they will not leave the way open between thee and the House until 
the last of their fighting men hath perished.” The Prophet said: “We came 
not here for battle; we came only to make our pilgrimal rounds about the 
House. He that standeth in our way, him we shall fight; but I will grant 
them time, if they so desire it, to take their precautions and to leave the way 
clear for us.” 

Budayl and his fellows returned to Mecca, and Quraysh received them in 
sullen silence. When they offered to tell them what Muhammad had said to 
them, ‘Ikrimah, the son of Abu Jahl, said they did not wish to hear it, 
whereupon ‘Urwah, one of their allies of Thaqlf - his mother was a 
Meccan - protested that this attitude was absurd. So Safwan said to 
Budayl: “Tell us what ye have seen and what ye have heard.” And he told 
them of the peaceful intent of the pilgrims, and also that the Prophet had 
said he was ready to give Quraysh time to prepare for their coming. Then 
‘Urwah said: “Budayl hath brought you a goodly concession such as no 
man can refuse except to his own hurt. So accept his hearsay of it, but send 


w. 589. 



250 Muhammad 

me to bring confirmation direct from Muhammad; and I will look on those 
who are with him, and I will be for you a scout, to bring you tidings of 
him.” 

Quraysh accepted his offer, but they had already sent, as scout and 
possible envoy, the man who commanded all their allies of the Bedouin 
tribes, known collectively as the Ahabish. This was Hulays of the Bani 
1 -Harith, one of the clans of Kinanah. It was he who had rebuked Abu 
Sufyan for the mutilations at Uhud. When the Prophet saw him coming, he 
knew - either from his gait and demeanour or from what he had heard of 
him - that he was a man of piety, with a great reverence for sacred things, 
so he gave orders that the animals they intended to sacrifice should be sent 
to meet him; and when the seventy camels solemnly filed past Hulays with 
their marks of consecration and their festive ornaments he was so impress¬ 
ed that without going to speak to the Prophet he went straight back to 
Quraysh and assured them that the pilgrims intentions were entirely 
peaceful. Exasperated, the Meccans told him that he was merely a man of 
the desert and that he had no knowledge of the situation. This was a great 
tactical error, as they soon realised, but too late. “Men of Quraysh,” he 
said sternly, “not for this, by God, did we consent to be your allies, and not 
for this pledged we our pact with you. Shall one who cometh to honour the 
House of God be banned from it? By Him in whose hand is my soul, either 
ye let Muhammad do what he hath come to do, or I lead away the Ahabish, 
every man of them.” “Bear with us, Hulays,” they said, “until we reach 
terms that we can accept.” 

Meantime ‘Urwah of Thaqif had arrived at the pilgrim’s camp, and was 
already in converse with the Prophet. Seated in front of him, he began by 
treating him as an equal and took him by the beard when he addressed 
him; but Mughlrah, one of the Emigrants who was standing by, rapped his 
hand with the flat of his sword, and he took it away. A few moments later, 
when he ventured to take the Prophet’s beard again, Mughlrah gave him a 
harder rap, saying: “From the beard of God’s Messenger take thy hand 
while it is yet thine to take.” ‘Urwah refrained from any further familiari¬ 
ties with the Prophet; but after talking with him at some length, he stayed 
in the camp for several hours. He had promised Quraysh to be their scout 
as well as their envoy, and he was bent on taking note of everything. But 
what impressed him most were things which he had not come to see, things 
of which he had never seen the like; and when he returned to Mecca he said 
to Quraysh: “O people, I have been sent as envoy unto kings - unto Caesar 
and Chosroes and the Negus — and I have not seen a king whose men so 
honour him as the companions of Muhammad honour Muhammad. If he 
commandeth aught, they almost outstrip his word in fulfilling it; when he 
performeth his ablution, they wellnigh fight for the water thereof; when he 
speaketh, their voices are hushed in his presence; nor will they look him 
full in the face, but lower their eyes in reverence for him. He hath offered 
you a goodly concession; therefore accept it from him.” 1 

While ‘Urwah was still in the camp, the Prophet had mounted a man of 
Ka‘b named Khirash on one of his camels and sent him as envoy to 


B. LIV, 15; W. 593-600. 


The Dilemma of Quraysh 2.51 

Quraysh. When he arrived, ‘Ikrimah hamstrung the camel; but Hulays and 
his men intervened and saved the envoy’s life, compelling Quraysh to let 
him go back to the Prophet. “O Messenger of God,” he said on his return, 
“send a man who is better protected than I am.” The Prophet called ‘Umar 
to him, but ‘Umar said that Quraysh knew well of his great hostility to 
them, and that none of his own clan, the Bani ‘Adi, were strong enough to 
defend him. “But I will show you,” he said, “a man who is more powerful 
in Mecca than I am, richer in kinsmen and better protected - ‘Uthman ibn 
‘Affan.” So the Prophet sent ‘Uthman and he was well received by his 
kinsmen of ‘Abdu Shams and by others; and though they reiterated to him 
their refusal to allow any of those now in Hudaybiyah to approach the 
Ka‘bah, they invited him personally to make his pilgrimal rounds, which 
he refused to do. Quraysh had already sent a message to Ibn Ubayy, 
offering the same concession to him also, but he replied: “I make not my 
rounds of the House until the Messenger of God maketh his.” The Prophet 
was told of this and it pleased him. 



LXVII 


“A Clear Victory” 


I T was during ‘Uthman’s absence in Mecca that there came over the 
Prophet a state which was comparable to that of receiving a Revelation 
but which left him in full possession of his faculties. He gave instruc¬ 
tions to one of his Companions, who thereupon went through the camp 
proclaiming: “The Holy Spirit hath descended upon the Messenger and 
commandeth allegiance. So go ye forth in the Name of God to make your 
pledge.”' Meantime the Prophet had seated himself beneath an acacia tree 
that was green with its spring foliage breaking into leaf; and one by one the 
Companions came and pledged allegiance to him. The first man to reach 
him was Sinan, who was of the same tribe as the Jahsh family, that is the 
Bani Asad ibn Khuzaymah. The crier had specified nothing about the 
nature of the pledge, so Sinan said “O Messenger of God, I pledge thee 
mine allegiance unto that which is in thy soul,” and the others pledged 
themselves accordingly. Then the Prophet said “I pledge the allegiance of 
TJthman,” whereupon he put out his left hand, as the hand of his 
son-in-law, and grasping it with his right hand, pledged the pact. Only one 
man present failed to respond to the crier, and that was the hypocrite Jadd 
ibn Qays who tried to hide behind his camel but was none the less seen. 

Quraysh now sent Suhayl to conclude a treaty, and with him were his 
two clansmen Mikraz and Huwaytib. They conferred with the Prophet, 
and the Companions heard their voices rise and fall according to whether 
the point in question was hard to agree upon or easy. When they had finally 
reached an agreement the Prophet told ‘All to write down the terms, 
beginning with the revealed words of consecration Bismi Llahi r-Rahmani 
r-Rahlm, in the Name of God, the Good, the Merciful , but Suhayl objected. 
“As to Rahman ,” he said, “I know not what he is. But write Bismik 
Allahumma , In Thy Name, O God, as thou wert wont to write.” Some of 
the Companions cried out “By God, we will write naught but Bismi Llahi 
r-Rahmani r-Rahimf” but the Prophet ignored them and said “Write 
Bismik Allahumma ,” and he went on dictating: “These are the terms of the 
truce between Muhammad the Messenger of God and Suhayl the son of 
‘Amr”; but again Suhayl protested. “If we knew thee to be the Messenger of 
God,” he said, “we would not have barred thee from the House, neither 
would we have fought thee; but write Muhammad the son of ‘Abd Allah.” 
‘All had already written “the Messenger of God,” and the Prophet told him 
to strike out those words, but he said he could not. So the Prophet told him 


1 W.604. 



“A Clear Victory” 253 


to point with his finger to the words in question, and he himself struck 
them out. Then he told him to write in their place “the son of ‘Abd Allah,” 
which he did. 

The document continued: “They have agreed to lay down the burden of 
war for ten years, in which times men shall be safe and not lay violent 
hands the one upon the other; on condition that whoso cometh unto 
Muhammad of Quraysh without the leave of his guardian, Muhammad 
shall return him unto them; but whoso cometh unto Quraysh of those who 
are with Muhammad, they shall not be returned. There shall be no 
subterfuge and no treachery. And whoso wisheth to enter into the bond 
and pact of Muhammad may do so; and whoso wisheth to enter the bond 
and pact of Quraysh may do so.” Now there were present in the camp 
some leading men of Khuza‘ah who had come to visit the pilgrims, whereas 
one or two representatives of Bakr had followed in the wake of Suhayl; and 
at this point the men of Khuza‘ah leaped to their feet and said: “We are one 
with Muhammad in his bond and his pact.” Whereupon the men of Bakr 
said: “We are one with Quraysh in their bond and their pact.” And this 
agreement was subsequently ratified by the chiefs of both tribes. The treaty 
ended with the words: “Thou, Muhammad, shalt depart from us this 
present year, and shalt not enter Mecca when we are present in despite of 
us. But in the year that is to come, we shall go out from Mecca and thou 
shalt enter it with thy companions, staying therein for three days, bearing 
no arms save the arms of the traveller, with swords in sheaths.” 1 

In virtue of the Prophet’s vision, the Companions had been certain of the 
success of their expedition; and when they heard the terms of the treaty 
and realised that having reached the very edge of the sacred precinct they 
must now return home with nothing accomplished, it was almost more 
than they could endure. But worse was to come: as they sat there in sullen 
and explosive silence, the clank of chains was heard and a youth staggered 
into the camp with his feet in fetters. It was Abu Jandal, one of the younger 
sons of Suhayl. His father had imprisoned him on account of his Islam, 
fearing that he would escape to Medina. His elder brother ‘Abd Allah was 
among the pilgrims and was about to welcome him when Suhayl caught 
hold of the chain that was round his prisoner’s neck and struck him 
violently in the face. Then he turned to the Prophet and said: “Our 
agreement was concluded before this man came to thee.” “That is true,” 
said the Prophet. “Return him then unto us,” said Suhayl. “O Muslims,” 
shouted Abu Jandal at the top of his voice, “am I to be returned unto the 
idolaters, for them to persecute me on account of my religion?” The 
Prophet took Suhayl aside and asked him as a favour to let his son go free, 
but Suhayl implacably refused. His fellow envoys, Mikraz and Huwaytib, 
had been so far silent; but now, feeling that this incident was an inaus¬ 
picious start for the truce, they intervened. “O Muhammad,” they said, 
“we give him our protection on thy behalf.” This meant that they would 
lodge him with them, away from his father, and they held to their promise. 
“Be patient, Abu Jandal,” said the Prophet. “God will surely give thee and 
those with thee relief and a way out. We have agreed on the terms of a truce 


1 U.747-8. 



254 Muhammad 

with these people, and have given them our solemn pledge, even as they 
have done to us, and we will not now break our word.” 

At this point ‘Umar could no longer contain himself. Rising to his feet, 
he went to the Prophet and said “Art thou not God’s Prophet?” and he 
answered “Yea.” “Are we not in the right and our enemies in the wrong?” 
he said, and again the Prophet assented. “Then why yield we in such lowly 
wise against the honour of our religion?” said ‘Umar, whereupon the 
Prophet replied: “I am God’s Messenger and 1 will not disobey Him. He 
will give me the victory.” “But didst thou not tell us,” persisted ‘Umar, 
“that we should go unto the House and make our rounds about it?” “Even 
so,” said the Prophet, “but did I tell thee we should go to it this year?” 
‘Umar conceded that he had not. “Verily thou shalt go unto the House,” 
said the Prophet, “and shalt make thy rounds about it.” But ‘Umar was still 
seething with indignation, and went to Abu Bakr to work off his feelings 
still further. He put to him exactly the same questions he had put to the 
Prophet; but though Abu Bakr had not heard the answers, he gave him the 
same answer to each question in almost exactly the same words; and at the 
end he added: “So cleave unto his stirrup, for by God he is right.” This 
impressed ‘Umar, and though his feelings had not yet subsided, he gave no 
further vent to them, and when the Prophet summoned him to put his 
name to the treaty he signed it in silence. The Prophet also told Suhayl’s son 
‘Abd Allah to put his name to it. Others of the Muslims who signed it were 
‘All, Abu Bakr, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf and Mahmud ibn Maslamah. 

Some of the general bitterness seemed to have been smoothed over; but 
when Suhayl and the others left the camp, taking with them the tearful Abu 
Jandal, men’s souls were stirred up again. The Prophet was standing apart, 
with those who had signed the document. He now left them, and went 
towards the main body of the pilgrims. “Rise and sacrifice your animals,” 
he said, “and shave your heads.” Not a man moved, and he repeated it a 
second and a third time, but they simply looked at him in dazed and 
bewildered silence. It was not a rebellion on their part, but having had their 
expectations shattered by the turn of events they were now genuinely 
perplexed by the command to do something which they knew to be ritually 
incorrect; for according to the tradition of Abraham the sacrifices had to 
be performed within the sacred territory, and the same applied to the rite of 
shaving the head. None the less, their apparent disobedience dismayed the 
Prophet, who withdrew to his tent and told Umm Salamah what had 
happened. “Go forth,” she said, “and say no word to any man until thou 
hast performed thy sacrifice.” So the Prophet went to the camel which he 
himself had consecrated and sacrificed it, saying in a loud voice, so that the 
men could hear: Bismi-Llah, Allahu Akbar. At these words the men leaped 
to their feet and raced to make their sacrifices, falling over each other in 
their eagerness to obey; and when the Prophet called for Khirash - the man 
of Khuza‘ah he had sent to Mecca before ‘Uthman - to shave his head, 
many of the Companions set about shaving each other’s heads so vigorous- 
ly that Umm Salamah was afraid, as she afterwards remarked, that mortal 
wounds might be inflicted. But some of them merely cut locks of their hair, 
knowing that this was traditionally acceptable as a substitute. Meantime 
the Prophet had retired to his tent with Khirash; and when the rite had 


“A Clear Victory” 255 

been accomplished he stood at the entrance with shaven scalp and said: 
“God have Mercy on the shavers of their heads!” Whereupon those who 
had cut their hair protested: “And on the cutters of their hair, O Messenger 
of God!” But the Prophet repeated what he had said at first, and the voices 
were raised in protest still louder. Then after another repetition and a third 
thunderous protest he added: “And upon the cutters of their hair!” When 
asked afterwards why he had first of all prayed only for the shavers of their 
heads, he answered: “Because they doubted not.” 

Returning to his tent, the Prophet gathered up his luxuriant black hair 
from the ground and threw it over a nearby mimosa tree, whereupon the 
men crowded round, each bent on taking what he could for its blessing. 
Nor was Nusaybah to be outdone by the men, and she also made her way 
to the tree, and was able to snatch some locks, which she treasured until 
her dying day. 

The earth of the camp was strewn with the hair of the pilgrims. But 
suddenly there came a powerful gust of wind which lifted the hair from the 
ground and blew it towards Mecca, into the sacred territory; and everyone 
rejoiced, taking it as a sign that their pilgrimage had been accepted by God 
in virtue of their intentions, and they now understood why the Prophet had 
told them to perform their sacrifices. 

After they had set off on the return journey to Medina, ‘Umar’s conscience 
began to trouble him; and his anxiety was greatly increased when he rode 
up to the Prophet, seeking to enter into conversation with him, and the 
Prophet, so it seemed to him, was markedly distant and reserved. ‘Umar 
rode on ahead, saying to himself: “O ‘Umar, let thy mother now mourn her 
son!” He said afterwards that he was so troubled for having questioned the 
wisdom of the Prophet that he feared there would be a special Revelation 
condemning him. His fears reached their height when he heard behind him 
the hooves of a galloping horse, and the rider summoned him back to the 
Prophet. But his troubles vanished in an instant when he saw the Prophet’s 
face radiant with joy. “There hath descended upon me a surah” he said, 
which is dearer to me than aught else beneath the sun.” 

The new Revelation left no doubt that the expedition from which they 
were now returning must be considered as a victorious one, for it opened 
with the words: Verily We have given thee a clear victory .' It also spoke of 
the recent pact of allegiance: God was well pleased with the believers when 
they pledged allegiance unto thee beneath the tree. He knew what was in 
their hearts, and sent down the Spirit of Peace upon them , and hath given 
them the meed of a near victory . 1 The Divine Good Pleasure referred to is 
no less than the promise of Ridwan 3 for him who fulfilled his pledge, and so 
this beatific allegiance is known as the Pact of Ridwan. The descent of the 
Saktnahf the Spirit of Peace, is mentioned also in another verse: He it is 
who sent down the Spirit of Peace into the hearts of the believers that they 
might increase in faith upon their faith . . . that He may bring the believing 
men and the believing women into gardens that are watered by flowing 
rivers, gardens wherein they shall dwell immortal, and that He may take 

1 XLVIII, 1. 2 XLVIII, 18. 3 Seep-95. 4 Hebrew Shekinah. 


156 Muhammad 

from them all guilt of evil. Triumph immense for them is that in the sight of 
God.' 

The Prophet’s vision, which had prompted the expedition, is referred to 
as follows: God hath truly fulfilled for His Messenger the vision: God 
willing, ye shall enter the inviolable mosque in safety, not fearing, with the 
hair of your heads shaven or cut. But He knoweth what ye know not, and 
before that hath He given you a near victory . 1 


1 XLVIII, 4—5. 


2 XLVIII, 17. 


LXVIII 

After Hudaybiyab 


4 BU BA SIR of the Bani Thaqlf was a young man whose family had 
f\ come from Ta‘if and settled in Mecca as confederates of the Bani 
JL JL Zuhrah. He had entered Islam and they had imprisoned him, but he 
escaped and made his way to Medina on foot, arriving there shortly after 
the Prophet’s return from Hudaybiyah. He was soon followed by an envoy 
of Quraysh who demanded his return. While giving Abu Baslr the same 
words of comfort that he had given to Abu Jandal, the Prophet told him 
that he was bound by the treaty to deliver him into the hands of the envoy. 
The Companions, including ‘Umar, were now more or less reconciled to 
the terms of the treaty, so when Abu Baslr was led off by the man of 
Quraysh and the freed slave he had brought with him for support, those 
Emigrants and Helpers who were present serenely echoed the words of the 
Prophet: “Be of good cheer! God will surely find thee a way out.” 

Their hopes were realised sooner than was expected. Despite his youth, 
Abu Baslr was a resourceful man and at the first halt he contrived to get the 
sword of the envoy and to kill him, whereupon the freedman, Kawthar by 
name, fled headlong back to Medina. He entered the Mosque unopposed 
and threw himself at the feet of the Prophet, who happened to be there and 
who said as he approached: “This man hath seen some terrible thing.” 
Kawthar gasped out that his fellow had been killed and that he himself was 
all but killed, and it was not long before Abu Baslr himself appeared with 
the drawn sword in his hand. “O Prophet of God,” he said, “thine 
obligation hath been fulfilled. Thou didst return me unto them, and God 
hath delivered me.” “Alas for his mother!” 1 said the Prophet. “What a fine 
firebrand for war, had he but other men with him!” But if Quraysh sent 
further envoys to demand his return he would be bound to comply, as he 
had done in the first case. Such an idea however was far from the mind of 
Abu Baslr, who now suggested that the arms and the armour of the dead 
man together with the camels should be treated as booty, divided into five 
parts and distributed according to the law. “If I did that,” said the Prophet, 
“they would hold that 1 had not fulfilled the terms I swore to keep.” Then 
he turned to the terrified survivor of the two Meccans. “The spoil 
plundered from thy fellow is thy concern,” he said. “And take thou back 
this man to those who sent thee,” he added, indicating Abu Baslr. Kawthar 
turned pale: “O Muhammad,” he said, “I value my life. My strength is not 

1 An often used ellipsis meaning: “The man is such a hothead that his mother will soon 
have to mourn his death.” 


258 Muhammad 

enough for him, nor have I the hands of two men.” The Muslims had 
fulfilled their obligation, but the representative of Quraysh had refused to 
take custody of the prisoner. So the Prophet turned to Abu Baslr and said: 
“Go whither thou wilt.” 

He made his way to the shores of the Red Sea, with the words “had he 
but other men with him” still in his ears. Nor was he the only one who had 
taken note of this veiled authorisation and instruction. ‘Umar had been 
intent on what had passed; and he contrived to pass the Prophet’s words 
on to the Muslims in Mecca, together with information about Abu Basir’s 
whereabouts which he soon learned from friendly men of the coastal tribes 
who came to Medina. Now Suhayl’s son, Abu Jandal, was no longer 
closely guarded by his protectors as he had been by his father; and in any 
case the treaty had made for a general slackening of vigilance in Mecca as 
to the watch kept on the young Muslim prisoners, for Muhammad had 
shown that if they escaped to Medina he would keep to his word and 
return them. So Abu Jandal made his way to Abu Bas>ir, and other youths 
did the same, including Walid, the brother of Khalid. Abu Baslr made with 
them a camp at a strategic point on the Meccan caravan route to Syria. 
They recognised him as their leader and he led them in prayer and advised 
them on questions concerning the rites and other aspects of the religion, for 
many of them were recent converts, and they greatly respected him and 
gladly obeyed him. Quraysh had been rejoicing in the re-established safety 
of their favourite road to the north. But no less than seventy young men 
joined Abu Basir’s camp, and they became the terror of the caravans. 
Finally, after they had suffered the loss of many lives and much merchan¬ 
dise, Quraysh sent a letter to the Prophet asking him to take these 
highwaymen into his community, and promising that they would not ask 
for them to be returned to Mecca. So the Prophet wrote to Abu Baslr that 
he could now come to Medina with his companions. But meantime the 
young leader had fallen seriously ill and when the letter arrived death was 
close upon him. He read it and died clasping it between his hands. His 
companions prayed over him and buried him, and made a mosque at the. 
place of his burial; then they went to join the Prophet in Medina. 1 

When they reached the lava tract Walld’s camel stumbled and threw 
him, so that he cut his finger on a stone. As he bound it up, he addressed it 
in verse, saying: 


“What art thou but a finger shedding blood. 

With no wound else upon the path of God.” 

But the cut festered, and the wound proved to be mortal. He was able, none 
the less, before he died, to write a letter to his brother Khalid urging him to 
enter Islam. 

Only one Muslim woman escaped from Mecca at this time and took 
refuge in Medina, and that was ‘Uthman’s half-sister, Umm Kulthum, the 
daughter of his mother Arwa and of ‘Uqbah, who had been put to death on 
the way from Badr. But a Revelation now came forbidding the return of 


1 W. 624-9; B.LfV;I.I. 751-3. 



After Hudaybiy ah 2.59 

any believing women to the disbelievers. So when Umm KulthunTs two full 
brothers came to take her back, the Prophet refused to let them have her, 
and Quraysh accepted his refusal without protest. There had been no 
mention of women in the treaty. Then Zayd and Zubayr and ‘Abd 
ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf asked for her hand in marriage, and the Prophet 
advised her to marry Zayd, which she did. 

In the month which followed the treaty, ‘A’ishah and her father suffered 
a great loss which was shortly to be followed by cause for great rejoicing. 
Umm Ruman fell ill and died. She was buried in the Baql‘, and the Prophet 
prayed over her and descended into her grave. Inevitably the news of her 
death was brought to Mecca and came to the ears of her son, ‘Abd 
al-Ka‘bah; and it is possible that his bereavement prompted him to take an 
action which he had no doubt been contemplating for some time. However 
that may be, it was not long after his mother’s death that he came to 
Medina and entered Islam. When he pledged his allegiance, the Prophet 
changed his name to ‘Abd ar-Rahman. 

Nor was he the only new Muslim at this time. As the weeks and the 
months passed it became more and more apparent why the Koran had 
declared the truce to be a clear victory. The men of Mecca and Medina 
could now meet in peace and converse freely together; and during the next 
two years the community of Islam was more than doubled. 

Soon after the return of the pilgrims a verse had been revealed at which 
everyone rejoiced: It may be that God will establish love between you and 
those with whom ye are at enmity . 1 These words seemed to refer in general 
to the many conversions which now took place. But they were also taken 
by some to refer in particular to an unexpected close relationship which 
was now to be established between the Prophet and one of the leaders of 
Quraysh. 

A few months before Hudaybiyah news had come from Abyssinia of the 
death of ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Jahsh, the Prophet’s cousin and brother-in-law. 
He had been a Christian before he entered Islam, and not long after his 
emigration to Abyssinia he had reverted to Christianity. This had greatly 
distressed his wife Umm Hablbah, Abu Sufyan’s daughter, who remained 
a Muslim; and when four months had elapsed after the death of her 
husband the Prophet sent a message to the Negus, asking him to stand 
proxy for himself and to ratify a marriage between him and the widow, if 
she were willing. To her the Prophet sent no message directly; but she had a 
dream in which someone came to her and addressed her as “mother of the 
faithful”, and she interpreted this as meaning that she would become the 
wife of the Prophet. The next day she received the message from the Negus 
which confirmed her dream, whereupon she chose her kinsman Khalid ibn 
Sa‘Id 2 to give her in marriage, and he and the Negus solemnised the pact 
between them in the presence of Ja‘far and others of the brethren. Then the 
Negus held a wedding feast in his palace, and all the Muslims were invited. 

The Prophet had also sent word to Ja'far that it would please him if he 
and his community would now come to live in Medina. Ja‘far forthwith set 
about making preparations for the journey, and the Negus gave them two 


1 LX, 70. 


2 Seep. 47. 



z 6 o Muhammad 


boats. It was decided that Umm Habibah should travel with them; and in 
Medina work was begun on the building of an apartment for her next to 
those of the other wives. 

The Negus was not the only reigning prince to whom the Prophet sent a 
letter at this time. When he had split the seemingly invincible rock in the 
trench, he had seen the castles of the Yemen by the light which had flared 
from it at his first blow, whereas by the light which flared from his third 
and final blow he had seen the white palace of Chosroes at Mada‘in. As to 
the certainty which had then been given him about the future spread of the 
empire of Islam, there was a connection between these two lights inasmuch 
as the Yemen was now under the rule of Persia; and the Prophet was 
moved to write to the Persian monarch, informing him of his Prophethood 
and summoning him to Islam. He may not have had much hopes of the 
success of his message, but it was necessary to offer him the possibility of 
making the right choice before any other action was taken. 

As to the second of the three lights, it had revealed the castles of Syria, 
and the Prophet had received from it the certainty of the spread of Islam to 
those parts and also to the West. He now dictated a letter to Heraclius the 
Roman Emperor in the same terms as the letter to Persia, and he sent it to 
the governor of Syria. Another similar letter was sent to Alexandria, to the 
Muqawqis, the ruler of Egypt. 

Meantime Chosroes had heard from other sources of the growing power 
of the Arab king of Yathrib who claimed to be a Prophet. So he dispatched 
an order to Badhan, his viceroy in the Yemen, asking for further and 
clearer information about Muhammad. Badhan forthwith sent two en¬ 
voys to Medina, so that they could see for themselves and bring him back 
news. Following a fashion that was prevalent at the Persian court, they had 
shaved their beards and grown long moustaches. Their appearance was 
abhorrent to the Prophet. “Who bade you do this?” he exclaimed. “Our 
lord,” they said, meaning Chosroes.” “My Lord,” said the Prophet, “hath 
bidden me grow my beard and cut short my moustache.” He sent them 
away, telling them to return to him the next day. That night Gabriel told 
him that on the same day there had been an uprising in Persia in which 
Chosroes had been killed, and his son now reigned in his stead. So when 
the envoys returned he told them of this, and bade them inform their 
master the viceroy. Then he said: “Tell him that my religion and mine 
empire will reach far beyond the kingdom of Chosroes; and say unto him 
from me: Enter Islam, and I will confirm thee in what thou hast, and I will 
appoint thee king over thy people in the Yemen.” 

They returned to San‘a’, not knowing what to think, and delivered the 
message to Badhan, who said: “We will see what befalleth. If what he said 
be true, then is he a Prophet whom God hath sent.” But even before he had 
had time to send a man to Persia to find out the truth of the matter, a 
messenger arrived from Siroes, the new Shah, announcing what had 
happened, and claiming their allegiance. Instead of replying, Badhan 
entered Islam, and so did his two messengers and other Persians who were 
with him. He then sent word to Medina, and the Prophet confirmed his 
rule over the Yemen. That was the beginning of the fulfilment of what had 
been revealed in the first flash of light from the trench. 



After Hudaybiy ah 161 

The Prophet’s letter reached Mada‘in after the death of Chbsroes, so it 
was delivered to his successor, whose sole answer was to tear it in pieces. 
“Even so, O Lord, tear from him his kingdom,” said the Prophet when he 
heard of this. 

In these same weeks after the return of the pilgrims there was an attack 
on the Prophet’s life by a means which had not yet been used against him. 
In every generation of the Jews in Arabia there could be found one or two 
adepts in the science of magic; and one of these was amongst the Jews still 
living in Medina, Labid by name, an expert sorcerer who had also 
instructed his daughters in the subtle art lest his own knowledge should die 
with him. Labid now received a heavy bribe to put as deadly a spell as he 
could upon the Prophet. For this purpose he needed some combings of his 
hair, which he or one of his daughters contrived to procure, possibly 
through the intermediary of an entirely innocent person. He tied eleven 
knots in the hair, and his daughters breathed imprecations upon each knot. 
Then he attached it to a sprig from a male date-palm which had on it the 
outer sheath of the pollen, and threw it into a deep well. The spell could 
only be undone by the untying of the knots. 

The Prophet was soon aware that something was seriously wrong. On 
the one hand his memory began to fail him, while on the other hand he 
began to imagine that he had done things which in fact he had not done. He 
was also overcome with weakness, and when food was pressed upon him 
he could not bring himself to eat. He prayed God to cure him, and in his 
sleep he was conscious of two persons, one sitting at his head and the other 
at his feet. He heard one of them inform the other of the exact cause of his 
infirmity and of the name of the well. 1 When he woke Gabriel came to him, 
and confirming his dream he gave him two surahs of the Koran, one of 
which contains five verses and the other six. The Prophet sent ‘All to the 
well, telling him to recite over it the two surahs . At each verse one of the 
knots untied itself until all were untied and the Prophet recovered his full 
strength of mind and body. 2 

The first of the two surahs is: 

Say: I take refuge in the Lord of daybreak 
from the evil of that which He hath created, 
and from the evil of dusk when it dimmeth into night, 
and from the evil of the women who breathe upon knots, 
and from the evil of the envier when he enviethd 

The second is: 

Say: I take refuge in the Lord of men, 

The King of men, 
the God of men, 

from the evil of the stealthy whisperer, 
who whispereth in the breasts of men; 
from jinn and from men* 

1 B. LIX, io. 2 Baydawlon K. CXIII, 4 . 3 CXIII. 

4 CXIV. According to some authorities these two surahs which were recited on this 
occasion were not then newly revealed but had been given to the Prophet in Mecca before the 
Hijrah. 



26 z Muhammad 


These surahs are placed last of all in the Koran. They are called “the two 
takings of refuge”, and are recited continually for protection against all 
manner of evil. 

The Prophet ordered the well to be filled up and another to be dug near 
at hand to replace it. He sent for Labld, who confessed to having placed the 
spell upon him for the sake of a bribe, but he did not take any action 
against him. 



LXIX 


Kbaybar 


T HE truce with Mecca made it possible to concentrate on the dangers 
which lay to the north. The greatest of these was the town of 
Khaybar, occupied by Jews who were for the most part implacably 
hostile to Islam. The sorcerer Labld had almost certainly been bribed from 
there, though that could have been the work of an individual. But there 
were far more evident and general reasons for taking action against the 
exiled Bani Nadir and their Khaybarite kinsmen. Not that they were likely 
to invade Yathrib. Except for one or two men, they had not taken any 
direct part in the campaign of the Trench, but it was they who had given 
Quraysh every encouragement to attack, and it was their influence which 
had induced their allies of Ghatafan to side with Quraysh on that occasion. 
It was also largely through them that Ghatafan still remained virtually at 
war with the oasis. Medina could never know any fullness of peace while 
Khaybar remained as it was. 

It had long been clear that something must be done, sooner or later, in 
that direction; and now the time had come, for the Prophet was certain 
that the near victory promised in the recent Revelation - a victory which 
would moreover be rich in spoils - could be nothing other than the 
conquest of Khaybar. But this was not to be shared by all who professed 
Islam. The Revelation made it clear that those Bedouin who had failed to 
respond to his summons to make the Lesser Pilgrimage had been largely 
prompted by mercenary motives. Since there was no hope of plunder on 
the Pilgrimage, it was not worth the effort. They were therefore not to be 
allowed to take part in the conquest of what was, without doubt, one of the 
richest communities in all Arabia. 

This meant setting off with a smaller force, though it had the advantage 
that their plans could be kept secret until the last moment. But even when 
the project became known, it was passed from mouth to mouth as a 
pleasantry rather than a fact. The impregnable strength of Khaybar was 
almost proverbial. Quraysh and the other enemies of Islam hoped that the 
news was true because, if so, Muhammad would at last receive a crushing 
defeat; but they feared it could not be true, for they knew he was not mad. 
As for the men of Khaybar themselves their confidence was such that they 
refused to believe it. They did not even trouble to ask their allies for help 
until certain news came from Medina that Muhammad was about to set 
forth. Only then did Kinanah, their virtual chief, make a speedy visit to 
Ghatafan, offering them half the date harvest for that year if they would 



164 Muhammad 

send them reinforcements. They agreed to do so and promised a force of 
four thousand men. The Jews of Khaybar were in the habit of donning 
their armour every day and lining up their full strength of fighting men, ten 
thousand in all. The help of Ghatafan would bring the number up to 
fourteen thousand; and according to the news from Medina, the invading 
army was of sixteen hundred men only. 

Before the Prophet set out, one of the men of Aws known as Abu ‘Abs 
came to him with a problem. He had a camel to ride, but his clothes were in 
rags and he had no means of procuring any provisions to take on the march 
and nothing to leave for the upkeep of his family, let alone buying himself a 
new garment. There were many others in similar circumstances, though 
this was an extreme case. But much had been spent on the Pilgrimage, and 
everything that had been gained so far in the way of spoil was outweighed 
by the increasing number of poverty-stricken converts who came to 
Medina from every direction. The Prophet gave Abu ‘Abs a fine long cloak, 
all that was available for the moment; but on the march, a day or two later, 
he noticed that he had on a much poorer cloak and he asked him: “Where 
is the cloak I gave thee?” “I sold it for eight dirhams,” said Abu ‘Abs, 
“Then I bought two dirhams worth of dates as provision for myself, and I 
left two dirhams for my family to live on, and bought a cloak for four 
dirhams.” The Prophet laughed and said: “O father of ‘Abs, thou and thy 
companions are poor indeed. But by Him in whose hand is my soul, if ye 
keep safe and live yet a little while, ye shall have abundance of provisions 
and leave abundantly for your families. Ye shall abound in dirhams and in 
slaves; and it will not be good for you!” 1 

At one point on the march, between two camps, the Prophet halted his 
army and called to a man of Aslam known as Ibn al-Akwa‘, who had, as he 
knew, a beautiful voice. “Dismount,” he said, “and sing us a song of thy 
camel-songs.” The Bedouin would sing to their camels as they rode from 
place to place. They would chant poems to old melodies, monotonous, 
haunting and plaintive; and to the sadly serene cadences of one of these Ibn 
al-Akwa‘ now chanted some words which the Prophet had taught them 
while they were digging the trench: 

“God, but for Thee we never had been guided, 

Never had given alms, nor prayed Thy prayer.” 

So it began; and when he had finished the Prophet said to him: “God have 
Mercy on thee,” at which ‘Umar protested: “Thou hast made it inevitable, 
O Messenger of God. Would thou hadst let us enjoy him longer!” He 
meant, as they all knew, that the Prophet had foretold his early martyr¬ 
dom, for they had come by experience to conclude that when he invoked 
Mercy upon anyone, that person had probably not long to live. 

Within two and a half days they were only an evening’s march from their 
goal. It was now important to take up a position that would put them as a 
barrier between Khaybar and her allies of Ghatafan. With this end in view 
the Prophet asked for a guide and during the night they reached an open 


1 W.636. 



Khaybar 265 

space in front of the walls. It was very dark, for the young crescent moon 
had already set; and so quiet was their approach that no one stirred in the 
town, and no domestic bird or beast gave the alert. Only at cockcrow was 
the silence broken. The call to prayer was hushed that dawn in the Muslim 
camp; and having prayed, they looked ahead of them in silence at this 
“garden of the Hijaz” which the increasing light gradually revealed to 
them as the fortresses began to loom up above the rich palm groves and 
fields of corn. The sun rose, and when the land workers came out with their 
spades and mattocks and baskets they were astonished to find themselves 
face to face with a grimly silent army. “Muhammad and his host,” they 
cried, and fled back into their strongholds. “Allahu Akbar /” said the 
Prophet, adding, in triumphant play upon the letters of the name: Kbaribat 
Khaybar! (Khaybar is crushed!). Then he solemnly sealed its defeat by 
reciting the revealed verse which says of the punishment of God: When it 
alighteth in front of their dwellings, bad morning then to those who have 
been warned! 1 But instead of saying it alighteth he said, “we alight.” 

The Jews held a hurried council of war. But despite the warning of one of 
their chiefs they decided to trust to their battlements. There was no 
comparison, they said, between the fortresses of Yathrib and their own 
mountain citadels, as they liked to call them. This decision to fight in 
separate groups was largely based on their greatest weakness, which was 
lack of unity. What the Revelation had told the Prophet about the Jews of 
Yathrib was also true of the Khaybarites: III feeling is rife amongst them. 
Thou countest them as one whole, but their hearts are divided} It was their 
misfortune to be now suddenly faced by an army which, though small, was 
penetrated with the discipline implied in the revealed verse: Verily God 
loveth those who fight for His cause in ranks as if they were a close-built 
block? an army of men whose souls delighted in the promise of the words: 
How many a little band hath overcome a multitude by God's leave! And 
God is with the steadfast. 4 

On the first day when the Prophet attacked the nearest fortress, the 
garrisons of the others did not march out in a body to attack the besiegers 
but remained behind their own walls and busied themselves with streng¬ 
thening their fortifications. These tactics reduced the disparity of numbers, 
but they put the steadfastness of the Muslims to the test of a long campaign 
on alien territory and many battles instead of one. The men of Khaybar 
were amongst the most expert marksmen of Arabia. Never before had the 
Muslims had such severe training in the use of their shields; and at the 
outset of the campaign the women in the camp were kept busy treating 
arrow wounds. Of the Prophet’s wives the lot had fallen a second time in 
succession to Umm Salamah; and amongst the other women who accom¬ 
panied the army to tend the wounded and keep up the supply of water 
behind the lines were the Prophet’s aunt Safiyyah, Umm Ayman, 
Nusaybah and Umm Sulaym, the mother of Anas. 

For several days nothing was achieved; but on the sixth night, when 
‘Umar was in command of the watch, a spy was caught in the camp, and in 
return for his life he gave them valuable information about the various 

1 XXXVII, 177. * L 1 X, 14. 3 LXI, 4. 4 II, Z49. __ 



z66 Muhammad 


fortresses, telling them which they could capture most easily and suggest¬ 
ing that they should begin with one which was not well guarded and which 
had a quantity of weapons stored in its spacious cellars, including some 
engines of war that had been used in the past against other fortresses, for 
like Yathrib Khaybar had often been plagued with civil discord. The next 
day the fortress was taken and the engines brought out to be used in other 
assaults, a ballista for hurling rocks and two testudos for bringing men up 
to the walls beneath an impregnable roof so that they could breach an 
entrance. Partly thanks to these engines, the easier fortresses fell one by 
one. The first powerful resistance they encountered was at a stronghold 
named Na‘im. Here the garrison came out in great force, and on that day 
every attack made by the Muslims was repulsed. “Tomorrow,” said the 
Prophet, “will I give the standard unto a man whom God and His 
messenger love. God will give us the victory by his hands; he is not one who 
turneth back in flight.” 

In his previous campaigns the Prophet had used relatively small flags as 
standards. But to Khaybar he had brought a great black standard made 
from a cloak of ‘ A’ishah’s. They called it “the Eagle”, and this he now gave 
to ‘All. Then he prayed tor him and his other Companions, that God 
should give them the victory. After another day of fierce fighting, in which 
Zubayr and the red-turbaned Abu Dujanah played an eminent part, ‘All 
led his men in a final onslaught which drove back the garrison deep into 
their stronghold, leaving the Muslims in command of the doors. The 
fortress surrendered, but not before many of its men had escaped to other 
fortresses through a back outlet. 

“Where are the Bani Ghatafan?” was a question that was being asked 
throughout Khaybar, but not answered. They had in fact set out with an 
army of four thousand men as promised. But after a day’s march they had 
heard during the night a strange voice - they did not know whether it came 
from earth or heaven - and the voice cried out three times in succession: 
“Your people! Your people! Your people!”, whereupon the men imagined 
that their families were in danger, and hastened back whence they had 
come, only to find everything in order. But having returned, they were 
unwilling to set out a second time, partly because many of them were 
convinced that they would now arrive too late to have a share in the defeat 
of the enemy. 

The most impregnable of the strongholds of Khaybar was known as the 
Citadel of Zubayr. It crowned a high mass of rock with a steep approach to 
the gates and sheer cliffs on all the other sides. Most of the fighting men 
who had escaped from the other fortresses had joined the citadel’s 
garrison, which remained firmly within the walls. The Prophet besieged 
them for three days, and then a Jew from another stronghold came to him 
and told him that they had a hidden resource which would enable them to 
hold out almost indefinitely; and he offered to tell him the secret, on 
condition that his life and property and family should be safe. The Prophet 
agreed, and the man showed him where he could dig down to dam an 
underground rivulet which flowed beneath the rocks of the citadel. They 
had steps leading down to it from within, and since the stream was never 
dry they kept no stores of water. So when it was cut off they were soon 


Khaybar 2.67 

driven by thirst to come out and fight, and after a savage battle they were 
defeated. 

The last of the strongholds to make any resistance was Qamus. This 
belonged to the family of Kinanah, one of the richest and most powerful 
clans of the Bani Nadir. Some of them had long lived in Khaybar whereas 
others of the family, including Kinanah himself, had recently settled there 
after they had been exiled from Yathrib. It was they especially who had 
been counting on the help of Ghatafan, whose failure to keep their promise 
had been an unnerving disappointment for them; and they were still 
further demoralised by the bad news brought by all those fugitives who 
had now crowded into Qamus. They none the less held out for fourteen 
days; then Kinanah sent word that he wished to come to terms with the 
Prophet, who said he was willing to negotiate. So the chieftain came down 
from the fortress with others of his family; and it was agreed that none of 
the garrison should be put to death or made captive - neither they nor their 
families — on condition that they should leave Khaybar and that all their 
possessions should become the property of the victors. The Prophet then 
added a further clause, namely that his obligation to spare their lives and 
let them go free should be annulled with regard to anyone who might try to 
conceal any of his possessions. Kinanah and the others agreed to this; and 
the Prophet called on Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘All and Zubayr and ten of the 
Jews to witness the agreement. 

But it soon became clear to both Jews and Muslims that much wealth 
was being hidden. Where was the famed treasure of the Bani Nadir which 
they had brought with them from Medina, and which they had so lavishly 
displayed in their procession through its streets? The Prophet questioned 
Kinanah about this, and he replied that since their arrival in Khaybar the 
treasure had all been sold to pay for more arms and armour and fortifica¬ 
tions. The Jews knew that he was lying, and were all the more apprehensive 
because many of them now believed themselves to be in the presence of a 
Prophet. They held that they had no need to follow him, because he had 
not been sent to them; but it would be clearly vain to try to deceive him. 
One of them, who had Kinanah’s welfare at heart, went to him and begged 
him to hide nothing, for if he did the Prophet would certainly be informed 
of it. Kinanah angrily rebuked him; but within less than a day the treasure 
was discovered, and Kinanah was put to death together with a cousin of his 
who was found to be privy to the concealment. Their families were made 
captive. 

After the fall of Qamus the two remaining fortresses surrendered on the 
same terms. Then the Jews of Khaybar consulted together, and sent a 
deputation to the Prophet, suggesting that since they were skilled in the 
management of their farms and their orchards he should allow them to 
remain in their homes, and they would pay him a yearly rent of half the 
produce. To this the Prophet agreed; but he stipulated that if in the future 
he decided to banish them they must go. It was then rumoured that the 
Muslims intended to extend their campaign to Fadak, a small but rich oasis 
to the north-east; and when the Jews of Fadak heard of the terms that had 
been imposed upon Khaybar they sent word offering to surrender on the 
same conditions. Fadak thus became the property of the Prophet, as did 



z6S Muhammad 


every other asset which had not been acquired by force of arms. 

When all the terms had been agreed upon, and when the victorious army 
had rested, the widowed wife of Sallam ibn Mishkam roasted a lamb and 
poisoned every part of it with a deadly poison which she concentrated 
especially in the shoulders, having learnt on inquiry that the Prophet 
preferred the shoulder of lamb to the other joints. Then she brought it to 
the camp and set it before him, whereupon he thanked her and invited 
those of his Companions who were present to sup with him. 

It happened on this occasion that seated next to the Prophet was a 
Khazrajite named Bishr, the son of that Bara’ who had led the Muslims of 
Yathrib to the Second ‘ Aqabah and who had been the first ever to pray the 
ritual prayer in the direction of Mecca. When the Prophet took a mouthful 
of lamb, Bishr did the same and swallowed it, but the Prophet spat out 
what was in his mouth, saying to the others: “Hold off your hands! This 
shoulder proclaimeth unto me that it is poisoned.” He sent for the woman 
and asked her if she had poisoned the joint. “Who told thee?” she asked. 
“The shoulder itself,” said the Prophet. “What made thee do it?” “Well 
thou knowest,” she said, “what thou hast done unto my people; and thou 
hast slain my father and mine uncle and my husband. So I told myself: ‘If he 
be a king, I shall be well quit of him; and if he be a Prophet he will be 
informed of the poison.’ ” The face of Bishr was already ashen pale, and he 
died shortly afterwards. But the Prophet none the less pardoned the 
woman. 1 

She was not the only woman who had lost a father and a husband at the 
hands of the Muslims. Among the captives taken as a result of Kinanah’s 
hiding the treasure was his widow Safiyyah, the daughter of that Huyayy 
who had persuaded the Bani Qurayzah to break their treaty with the 
Prophet, and who had been put to death with them after the Battle of the 
Trench. She was seventeen years old and had only married Kinanah a 
month or two before the Prophet set out from Medina. The marriage, 
while it lasted, had not been a happy one. Unlike her father and her 
husband, Safiyyah was of a deeply pious nature. From her earliest years she 
had heard her people talk of the Prophet who was soon to come, and this 
had filled her imagination. Then they had spoken of an Arab in Mecca, a 
man of Quraysh, who claimed to be that Prophet; and then came the news 
that he had arrived at Quba\ That was seven years ago, when she was a 
child of ten; and she well remembered her father and her uncle setting 
confidently out for Quba’ in order to reassure themselves that the man was 
an impostor; but what had imprinted itself on her memory above all was 
their return late at night, both in a state of extreme dejection. It was clear 
from what they said that they believed the newcomer to be the promised 
Prophet, but that they intended to oppose him; and her young mind was 
puzzled. 2 

Soon after her marriage, and not long before the Prophet arrived in front 
of Khaybar, she had had a dream. She saw a brilliant moon hanging in the 
sky, and she knew that beneath it lay the city of Medina. Then the moon 
began to move towards Khaybar, where it fell into her lap. When she woke 


1 B. LI, 2:8. 


2 u. 354-5. 



Khaybar 2.69 

she told Kinanah what she had seen in her sleep, whereupon he struck her a 
blow in the face and said: “This can only mean that thou desirest the King 
of the Hijaz, Muhammad.” The mark of the blow was still visible when she 
was brought as captive to the Prophet. He asked her what had caused it, 
and she told him of her dream. Now Dihyah 1 of the Bani Kalb, who had 
entered Islam shortly after Badr, had asked that Safiyyah should be given 
him as his share of the booty of Khaybar, or as part of his share, and the 
Prophet had agreed; but on hearing her dream he sent to Dihyah and told 
him he must take her cousin instead. He then told Safiyyah that he was 
prepared to set her free, and he offered her the choice between remaining a 
Jewess and returning to her people or entering Islam and becoming his 
wife. “I choose God and His Messenger,” she said; and they were married 
at the first halt on the homeward march. 

The campaign was not yet finished, for instead of returning by the direct 
way they had come, the Prophet turned a little to the west and besieged the 
Jews of Wadi 1 -Qura in their fortresses. They had been in league with 
Khaybar; and after three days they surrendered on the same terms. 

Ibn al-Akwa‘, the Aslamite who had sung to them on their northward 
march, had been killed at Khaybar during the attack upon the Citadel. His 
own sword had somehow turned against him and given him a mortal 
wound, and one of the Helpers remarked that he could not be counted as a 
martyr. “He lieth who so sayeth,” said the Prophet. “Verily he passeth 
through the Gardens of Paradise as freely as a swimmer passeth through 
water.” 2 Another question about martyrdom arose at Wadi 1 -Qura, where 
the Prophet’s black slave Karkarah was killed by an arrow as he was 
unsaddling a camel. But the Prophet answered: “He is burning even now in 
Hell beneath a cloak which he stole at Khaybar and which hath become a 
cloak of flames.” 3 

It was his wont to warn them continually that the privilege of living with 
him in his community brought with it a grave responsibility, for God was 
Just and would judge them more severely than those who lived in worse 
ages when it was more difficult to resist evil. He said: “Verily ye are in an 
age when whoso omitteth one tenth of the law shall be doomed. But there 
will come an age when whoso fulfilleth one tenth of the law shall be 
saved.” 4 

1 He was a man of great beauty, and the Prophet said of him: “The most like unto Gabriel 
of any man 1 have seen is Dihyah al-Kalbi.” I.S. IV, 184. 

1 W. 662. a I.I.765. 4 Tir. XXXI, 79. 



LXX 


“Whom Lovest 
Thou Most?” 


W HEN the victorious army reached Medina after their seven 
weeks’ absence they found that Ja‘far and his companions were 
already there. He had left for Abyssinia at the age of twenty- 
seven and was now a man of forty. He had not seen the Prophet for thirteen 
years, though they had been in constant communication. The Prophet 
clasped him to him and kissed him between the eyes. Then he said: “I know 
not for which of the two my rejoicing is greater, for the advent of Ja‘far 
or for the victory of Khaybar.” With Ja‘far was his wife Asma’ and their 
three sons, ‘Abd Allah, Muhammad and ‘Awn, who had been born in 
Abyssinia. 

With him also was Umm Habibah, whose apartment was ready to 
receive her, and a second marriage feast was held to celebrate her union 
with the Prophet. She was now about thirty-five years old. The other wives, 
all except ‘A’ishah, had known her in Mecca. She was, moreover, the 
sister-in-law of Zaynab, and Sawdah and Umm Salamah had been her 
close companions in their early days together in Abyssinia. Her coming 
had been expected, and caused little stir. An object of much greater 
concern to the wives was the unexpected addition to their household, the 
young and beautiful Safiyyah. On their arrival in Medina the Prophet 
lodged her temporarily in one of the houses of the ever-hospitable 
Harithah; and hearing of her beauty, ‘A’ishah sent to Umm Salamah to ask 
her about their new companion. “She is beautiful indeed,” said Umm 
Salamah, “and the Messenger of God loveth her much.” ‘A’ishah went to 
the house of Harithah and entered with the throng of women who were 
visiting the new bride. She herself was veiled, and without revealing her 
identity she remained somewhat in the background, but close enough to 
see for herself that what Umm Salamah had said was true. Then she left the 
house, but the Prophet who was there had recognised her, and following 
her out he said: “O ‘A’ishah, how didst thou find her?” “I saw in her,” said 
‘A’ishah, “a Jewess like any other Jewess.” “Say not so,” said the Prophet, 
“for she hath entered Islam and made good her Islam.” 

None the less, Safiyyah was particularly vulnerable amongst the wives 
on account of her father. “O daughter of Huyayy”, in itself a respectful 
address, could be changed by the tone of voice into an insult, and on one 


“Whom Lovest Thou Most?” 271 

occasion she came to the Prophet in tears because one of her new 
companions had tried to make her feel inferior. He said: “Say unto them: 
my father is Aaron, and mine uncle is Moses/’ 

Of all the wives Safiyyah was the nearest in age to ‘A’ishah, nearer even 
than Hafsah, who was now twenty-two. This had increased ‘A’ishah’s 
fears at first; but as the weeks passed the two youngest wives found a 
certain sympathy for each other, and Hafsah likewise befriended the 
newcomer. “We were two groups,” said ‘A’ishah in after years, “in one 
myself and Hafsah and Safiyyah and Sawdah, and in the other Umm 
Salamah and the rest of the wives.” 

‘A’ishah was at that time in her sixteenth year, old for her age in some 
respects but not in others. Her feelings were always clear from her face, 
and nearly always from her tongue. On one occasion the Prophet said to 
her: “O ‘A’ishah, it is not hidden from me when thou art angered against 
me, nor yet when thou art pleased.” “O dearer than my father and my 
mother,” she said, “how knowest thou that?” “When thou art pleased,” 
he said, “thou sayst in swearing ‘Nay, by the Lord of Muhammad’, but 
when thou art angered it is ‘Nay, by the Lord of Abraham’.” 1 On another 
occasion, when the Prophet came to her somewhat later than she had 
expected, she said to him: “Where hast thou been this day until now?” “O 
little fair one,” he said, “I have been with Umm Salamah.” “Hast thou not 
had thy fill of Umm Salamah?” she said; and when he smiled without 
answering, she added: “O Messenger of God, tell me of thyself. If thou 
wert between the two slopes of a valley, one of which had not been grazed 
whereas the other had been grazed, on which wouldst thou pasture thy 
flocks?” “On that which had not been grazed,” said the Prophet. “Even 
so,” she said; “and I am not as any other of thy wives. Every woman of 
them had a husband before thee, except myself.” The Prophet smiled and 
said nothing. 2 

‘A’ishah knew well that she could not have the Prophet for herself alone. 
She was one woman, and he was as twenty men. The Revelation had said of 
him: Verily of an immense magnitude is thy nature . It was as if he were a 
whole world in himself, comparable to the outer world and in some ways 
mysteriously one with it. She had often noticed that if there was a roll of 
thunder, even in the distance, his face would change colour; the sound of a 
powerful gust of wind would likewise visibly move him; and on at least one 
occasion when there was a downpour of rain he bared his head and 
shoulders and breast and went out into the open so that he might share the 
delight of the earth in receiving the bounty of heaven directly upon his skin. 

‘A’ishah was not any the less jealous by reason of his difference from 
other men; but she knew that jealousy, unlike love, was for this life only. 
Speaking of Paradise, the Revelation had promised more than once: And 
we remove whatever there may be of rancour in their breasts / One day she 
said to the Prophet: “O Messenger of God, who are thy wives in Para¬ 
dise?” “Thou art of them,” he said, and she treasured these words for the 
rest of her life, as also his having said to her once: “Gabriel is here and he 


1 I.S.VIII, 47 . 


2 I.S. VIII, 55. 


2 VII, 42; XV, 47. 



272. Muhammad. 

giveth thee his greetings of Peace.” “Peace be upon him, and the Mercy of 
God and His Blessings!” she had answered. 1 

Of her jealousy she would say in after-years: “I was not jealous of any 
other wife of the Prophet as I was jealous of Khadljah, for his constant 
mentioning of her and because God had bidden him give her good tidings 
of a mansion in Paradise of precious stones. And whensoever he sacrificed 
a sheep, he would send a goodly portion of it unto those who had been her 
intimate friends. Many a time said I unto him: It is as if there had never 
been any other woman in the world, save only Khadljah.” 2 

‘A’ishah’s perceptions and reactions were exceedingly quick. Soon after 
Khaybar, or perhaps a little before it, Halah the mother of Abu l-‘As had 
come on a visit to Medina to see her son and daughter-in-law Zaynab and 
her little granddaughter Umamah; and one day when the Prophet was in 
‘A’ishah’s apartment there was a knock on the door, and a woman’s voice 
was heard asking if she might enter. The Prophet turned pale and 
trembled; and immediately divining the cause, ‘A’ishah was overwhelmed 
by a wave of jealousy and scolded him; for she knew that in the voice of 
Halah he had heard the voice of her sister Khadljah. He confirmed this 
afterwards, and said that also her manner of asking to enter had been the 
same as that of his dead wife. 3 

Sawdah, now grown somewhat elderly, gave her day with the Prophet to 
‘A’ishah because she felt sure that this would greatly please him; and the 
rest of the community, including the other wives, had no doubt that of 
those wives now living it was ‘A’ishah that the Prophet loved most. This 
was not mere conjecture, since from time to time, by one or another of his 
Companions, he would be asked the question: “O Messenger of God, 
whom lovest thou most in all the world?” And although he did not always 
give the same answer to this question, inasmuch as he felt great love in 
more than one direction - for his daughters and their children, for ‘All, for 
Abu Bakr, for Zayd and Usamah—the answer was sometimes ‘A’ishah but 
never one of the other wives. For this reason it was becoming the custom in 
Medina that if a man had a favour to ask of the Prophet, and if he was 
offering him a gift with a view to his petition as the Koran recommended, 
he would postpone the offering until the Prophet was in ‘A’ishah’s 
apartment on the assumption that he was then at his happiest and 
therefore at his readiest to grant favour. This caused ill feeling in the 
household of the Prophet, and Umm Salamah went to him on behalf of 
herself and the others asking him to make an announcement that anyone 
wishing to give him a present should do so without waiting until it was his 
day to be in a particular house. The Prophet did not answer her, and she 
asked him a second time, and again he remained silent. Then she asked him 
a third time, and he said: “Trouble me not with regard unto ‘A’ishah, for 
verily the Revelation cometh not unto me when I am beneath the coverlet 
of a wife, except that wife be ‘A’ishah.” 4 Umm Salamah said: “I repent 
unto God for my having troubled thee.” But others of the wives were not 
content to stop there and they sent to Fatimah and asked her to intervene 
on their behalf and to say to him: “Thy wives adjure thee by God to give 


1 I.S. VII, 55. 


2 B. LXIII, zo. 


3 ibid. 


^ B. LI, 8. 



“Whom Lovest Thou Most?” 173 


them justice in respect of the daughter of Abu Bakr.” Fatimah reluctantly 
agreed to this, but put off doing it for some days until finally her cousin 
Zaynab, the daughter of Jahsh, came to her and insisted. So she went to her 
father and said what she had been asked to say. “My little daughter,” said 
the Prophet, “lovest thou not what I love?” And when she assented he said: 
“Then love her” - meaning ‘A’ishah. Then he said: “It was Zaynab who 
sent thee, was it not?” “Zaynab and the others,” said Fatimah. “I swear,” 
said the Prophet, “it was she who set this afoot.” And when Fatimah 
admitted it, he smiled. 

She returned to the wives and recounted what had happened. “O 
daughter of God’s Messenger,” they said, “thou hast availed us nothing!” 
They pressed her to go a second time, but she refused, so they said to 
Zaynab “Go thou,” and she went to the Prophet, who finally told ‘A’ishah 
to speak to her, and she produced arguments against which Zaynab could 
say nothing. The Prophet was bound to be just and equitable towards his 
wives, and to encourage others to follow his example; but he was not 
responsible for the equity of others towards his own wives. Nor would his 
sensitivity have allowed him to interfere; it was for him to receive a present 
with thanks, and to leave all else to the donor. When Zaynab had gone he 
said to ‘A’ishah: “Thou art indeed the daughter of Abu Bakr.” 1 

Jealousy was inevitable in the Prophet’s household, and he did his best to 
make light of it. Once he came into a room where his wives and others of 
his family were assembled, and in his hand was an onyx necklace which 
had just been given him. Holding it out to them he said: “I shall give this 
unto her whom I love best of all.” Some of the wives began to whisper 
wryly to each other: “He will give it to the daughter of Abu Bakr.” But 
when he had kept them long enough in suspense, he called his little 
granddaughter Umamah to him and clasped it round her neck. 

He was no less fond of his grandsons, the sons of All and Fatimah. “The 
dearest unto me of the people of my house are Hasan and Husayn,” he 
would say. Usamah was counted also as a grandson, and more than once 
the Prophet took him and Hasan each by a hand and prayed: “O God, I 
love them, love them Thou!” 2 

1 B. LI, 8; I.S. VIII, 123. 2 I.S.IV/1,43. 



LXXI 


After Khaybar 


T HE campaign of Khaybar was followed by six relatively small 
expeditions two of which, under ‘Umar and Abu Bakr respectively, 
were against hostile clans of the tribe of Hawazin whose territory 
blocked the main approach to the Yemen. The others were to the east and 
the north, against clans of Ghatafan. Two of these were against the Bani 
Murrah, whose territory adjoined the oasis of Fadak, which now belonged 
to the Prophet. Reduced to being his tenants, the Jews of Fadak required 
protection against the Bedouin; but the strength of these marauders was 
underestimated in Medina, so that only thirty men were sent on the first 
expedition, and they were nearly all killed. The Prophet immediately sent 
out a second force of two hundred, and the enemy were put to flight with 
considerable loss of life. There were also some captives taken, as well as 
camels and sheep. The seventeen-year-old Usamah was allowed to take 
part in this expedition. He had been with the army behind the Trench, but 
this was his first campaign in the fullest sense. During the encounter, a man 
of Murrah mocked at him on account of his youth. He soon had reason to 
regret it. Already bent on showing his mettle, Usamah was now goaded to 
fury and pursued the man far into the desert despite the orders given before 
the battle that they should all keep together; He finally caught up with him 
and wounded him, whereupon the Murrite shouted la ilaha ilia Lldh , there 
is no god but God. But despite this testification of Islam, Usamah dealt him 
the death-blow. 

The commander of the expedition was Ghalib ibn ‘Abd Allah; 1 and one 
of his first thoughts after the battle was: “Where is Usamah?” He and every 
other man in the army knew of the Prophet’s great love for the son of Zayd; 
and despite the victory it was to an exceedingly troubled camp that 
Usamah returned, one hour after nightfall. Ghalib sternly rated him. “I 
went after a man who was scoffing at me,” said the youth, “and when I had 
come up with him and had fleshed him, he said Id ilaha ilia Lldh .” 
“Whereupon thou didst sheathe thy sword?” said Ghalib. “Nay,” said 
Usamah, “not until I had made him drink the draught of death.” At that 
the whole camp thundered abuse, and he buried his head in his hands, 
overcome with shame. Nor could he bring himself to eat any food during 
the march home. There had been a Revelation which the older men well 
knew in connection with one or two cases where a believer had been about 

1 Of the Bani Layth, a clan of Kinanah. 



After Kbayhar 2.75 

to kill a disbeliever, who had then professed Islam; and exasperated at the 
idea of losing the spoils of armour and weapons which he had thought 
were his, the victor had said “Thou art not a believer,” and had killed him. 
In Usamah’s case the motive had been honour not spoils, but the principle 
was the same. The revealed verse was: O ye who believe, when ye fight in 
the way of God, discriminate , nor say unto him who proffereth you peace: 
"Thou art not a believer , ” seeking the gains of this lower life, for with God 
are spoils in plenty. Thus were ye wont to be aforetime , but God hath sent 
down His Grace upon you. Therefore discriminate. Verily God is In¬ 
formed of what ye do . 1 

As soon as they reached Medina Usamah went to the Prophet, who 
fondly embraced him. Then he said: “Now tell me of thy campaign.” So 
Usamah told him all that had happened since they had set out, and when 
he reached the point where he had killed the man, the Prophet said: “Didst 
thou, O Usamah, slay him when he had said Id ilaha ilia Llah ? “O 
Messenger of God,” he answered, “he did but say it to escape from being 
slain.” “And so,” said the Prophet, “thou didst split open his heart to 
know if he spake the truth or if he lied!” “Never again will I slay any man 
who saith la ilaha ilia Llah” said Usamah. And he would say afterwards: 
“I wished that I had only entered Islam on that day.” 2 For the Prophet had 
affirmed that the entry into the religion effaces the guilt of all past sins. 

After his return from Khaybar the Prophet himself stayed in Medina for 
nine months. Despite the lesser campaigns, the truce to the south and the 
victory to the north made these months a time of relative peace and 
prosperity, though the wealth which had been won from the Garden of the 
Hijaz gave rise also to certain problems. 

‘Umar came one morning to the house of the Messenger, and as he 
approached he heard the sound of women’s voices raised to a pitch which 
he considered to be unseemly in the prophetic presence. The women were 
moreover of Quraysh, that is, of the Emigrants, which confirmed his 
opinion that they were learning bad ways from the women of Medina who 
for generations had been less restrained and more self-assertive than the 
women of Mecca. The Prophet hated to refuse a request, as well they knew, 
and they were now asking him with some insistence to give them various 
garments which had come to him as part of his fifth in the spoils of war. 
There was a curtain spread across part of the room, and when ‘Umar’s 
voice was heard asking permission to enter there was a sudden total silence 
and the women hid themselves behind the curtain with such speed that he 
entered to find the Prophet speechless with laughter. “May God fill thy life 
with laughter, O Messenger of God,” he said. “Wondrous it was,” said the 
Prophet, “how these women who were with me even now - how speedily 
upon hearing thy voice they were gone behind that curtain!” “It is rather 
thy right, not mine, that they should stand in awe of thee, not of me,” said 
‘Umar. Then, addressing the women, he said: “O enemies of yourselves, 
fear ye me, and fear ye not God’s Messenger?” “It is even so,” they said, 
“for thou art rougher and harsher than God’s Messenger.” “That is true, 
O son of Khattab,” said the Prophet. Then he added: “By Him in whose 


1 IV, 94. 


2 W.725. 



176 Muhammad 

hand is my soul, if Satan found that thou wert travelling upon a certain 
path, he would choose to go himself by any other path but thine.” 1 

The newly won wealth and the consequent easing of the situation 
encouraged even Umm Ayman to ask the Prophet for a favour. She had 
long felt the need of a camel that she could call her own; and now she went 
to him and asked him to give her a mount. He looked at her seriously and 
said: “I will mount thee on the child of a camel.” “O Messenger of God,” 
she exclaimed, thinking that he meant a calf, “that is not meet for me. I 
want it not.” “I will not mount thee,” he said “save on the child of a 
camel.” 2 And so the altercation continued until a smile on the Prophet’s 
face made her realise that he was teasing her and that every camel is 
necessarily the child of a camel. 

On another day, however, ‘Umar found the Prophet in less good 
humour, with his head resting on his hand which was against his cheek. “O 
‘Umar,” he said, “they ask of me that which I have not.” He had said on his 
way to Khaybar, speaking of the increase of riches that the promised 
victory would bring to Medina: “It will not be good for you.” It was as he 
had said, and this applied to his own household as well as to others. Until 
then the Prophet and his family had lived a life of the utmost frugality. 
‘A’ishah said that before Khaybar she had not known what it was to eat her 
fill of dates. Such was the poverty of their ever-increasing dependants that 
the Prophet’s wives had only asked him for what they needed, and not 
always that. Things that could be dispensed with were given away, or else 
sold so that the money could be charitably spent. But the Prophet now had 
the pleasure of giving presents to his wives, and they for their part were not 
slow in learning to ask for more, which sometimes created problems, 
because equity demanded that what was given to one must be given to all. 

At the same time they began to take advantage of his indulgence in other 
ways. One day ‘Umar rebuked his wife for something and she sharply 
answered him back: and when he expostulated with her she replied that 
the wives of the Prophet were in the habit of answering him back so why 
should she not do the same. “And there is one of them,” she added, 
meaning their daughter, “who speaketh unto him her mind unabashed 
from morn till night.” Greatly troubled by this, ‘Umar went to Hafsah, 
who did not deny that what her mother had said was true. “Thou hast 
neither the grace of ‘A’ishah nor the beauty of Zaynab,” he said, hoping to 
shake her self-confidence; and when these words seemed to have no effect, 
he added: “Art thou so sure that if thou angerest the Prophet, God will not 
destroy thee in His anger?” 3 Then he went to his cousin Umm Salamah and 
said: “Is it true that ye speak your minds unto God’s Messenger and 
answer him without respect?” “By all that is wonderful,” said Umm 
Salamah, “what call hast thou to come between God’s Messenger and his 
wives? Yea, by God, we speak unto him our minds, and if he suffer us to do 
so that is his affair, and if he forbid us he will find us more obedient unto 
him than we are unto thee.” 4 ‘Umar felt that he had gone too far, and that 
the reproof was just; but there could be no doubt that all was not well in 
the Prophet’s household. 

1 B. LXII, 6. 


2 i.S. VIII, 163. 


3 I.S. VIII, 131. 


4 I.S. VIII, 137. 



After Khaybar 277 

The relatively sudden redress which now took place was partly due to an 
altogether unexpected event. The Prophet’s letter to the Muqawqis, 
summoning him to Islam, was answered evasively; but with his answer the 
ruler of Egypt sent a rich present of a thousand measures of gold, twenty 
robes of fine cloth, a mule, a she-ass and, as the crown of the gift, two 
Coptic Christian slave girls escorted by an elderly eunuch. The girls were 
sisters, Mariyah and Sirin, and both were beautiful, but Mariyah was 
exceptionally so, and the Prophet marvelled at her beauty. He gave Sirin to 
Hassan ibn Thabit, and lodged Mariyah in the nearby house where 
Safiyyah had lived before her apartment adjoining the Mosque was built. 
There he would visit her both by day and by night; but his wives became so 
openly jealous that she was unhappy, and he then lodged her in Upper 
Medina. ‘A’ishah and the others were at first relieved, but they soon found 
that they had gained nothing. For the Prophet did not visit Mariyah any the 
less often, and the added distance meant that his absences were even longer 
than before. 

They well knew that he was altogether within his rights - rights which 
had been recognised from the time of Abraham and before. Were they not 
all, except Safiyyah, descended from the union of Abraham with the 
bondmaid Hagar? Moreover, the law revealed to Moses had corroborated 
such rights, and the Koran itself expressly allowed a master to take his 
bondmaid as concubine on condition of her free consent. But the wives 
also knew that the Prophet was exceedingly sensitive, and they saw to it 
that his whole domestic life was now penetrated by their deliberately 
undisguised reactions. In particular Hafsah gave vent to such feeling that 
the Prophet was finally induced to swear that he would not see Mariyah 
again, and ‘A’ishah was Hafsah’s accomplice on this occasion. 

The Revelation which now came is known as the Surah of Banning 1 
because it opens with a reproof to the Prophet for having banned Mariyah 
from his life: O Prophet why bannest thou, to please thy wives, that which 
God hath made lawful unto theef Then, having formally absolved him 
from his oath, it addresses Hafsah and ‘A’ishah, though not by name: If ye 
twain repent unto God ye have cause, for your hearts were set upon the 
ban; and if ye aid each the other against him, verily God, even He, is his 
Protecting Friend, and Gabriel, and the elect of the faithful; and beyond 
these, the angels are massed to help him. The next verse is addressed to all 
the wives: It may be, if he divorce you, that his Lord will give him wives in 
your stead who are better than you, submissive unto God, believing, 
devout, penitent, inclined unto worship and fasting, widows and virgin 
maids. 

The Surah ends with examples from sacred history of two evil women 
and two women who were perfect: 

God citeth as example for those who disbelieve, the wife of Noah and 
the wife of Lot. They were under two righteous men from amongst Our 
slaves, men whom they betrayed and who thus availed them naught 
against God; and it was said unto both: Enter ye the fire with them who 
enter it. 

1 LXVI.__ 



zy8 Muhammad 

And God citeth as example for those who believe the wife of Pharaoh 
when she said: “My Lord, build for me a dwelling with Thee in Paradise, 
and save me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and save me from the people 
who transgressand Mary, the daughter of‘Imran, who kept chaste her 
womb and We breathed therein of Our Spirit . And she testified to the 
truth of the words of her Lord and His scriptures, and was of those who 
are absorbed in prayer. 

When he had recited this Revelation to his wives, the Prophet left them 
to meditate upon it, and withdrew to a roofed verandah which was the 
only room he had but for their apartments. News spread throughout 
Medina that he had divorced his wives, and it came to the ears of ‘Umar 
that night. At dawn he went as usual to the Mosque, but immediately after 
the prayer, before ‘Umar could address him, the Prophet withdrew to his 
porch. ‘Umar went to Hafsah and found her in tears. “Why weepest 
thou?” he said, adding before she could answer: “Did I not tell thee this 
would happen? Hath God’s Messenger divorced you?” “I know not,” she 
said, “but he is there, secluded by himself in that porch.” Its entrance was 
from the Mosque, to which ‘Umar now returned. There were gathered a 
group of men, sitting round the pulpit. Some of them were in tears; ‘Umar 
sat with them for a while and then unable to endure his feelings he went to 
the door of the porch where a black Abyssinian boy, a servant of the 
Prophet, was standing. “Ask permission for ‘Umar to enter,” he said to the 
boy, who went in and then came out after a moment saying: “I mentioned 
thee to him, but he was silent.” ‘Umar returned to where he had been 
sitting. Then he went again to ask if he might enter, and again he was told 
that the Prophet had made no response. This happened yet a third time; 
but just as ‘Umar had turned away the boy called out to him that the 
Prophet had said he might enter. ‘Umar went in and found him reclining on 
a rush mat. His back, which was partly bare, showed clearly the marks of 
the matting where it had pressed against his skin. A leather cushion, stuffed 
with palm fibre, was at his side, and on this he was leaning. His eyes were 
downcast, and he did not look at ‘Umar as he entered. “O Messenger of 
God,” said ‘Umar, “hast thou divorced thy wives?” The Prophet raised his 
eyes to ‘Umar’s. “Nay, I have not,” he said. “ Allahu Akbar /” exclaimed 
‘Umar, in a voice which could be heard in all the neighbouring houses. 
Umm Salamah said afterwards: “I was weeping, and when anyone came 
unto me they said ‘Hath God’s Messenger divorced thee?’ and I said ‘By 
God, I know not.’ This continued until ‘Umar came to the Prophet. We 
heard his magnification — we were all in our apartments - and we knew 
that the Messenger of God had answered ‘Nay’ to his question.” There was 
in fact only one question in anybody’s mind, and they were certain that 
‘Umar would be especially preoccupied with it on account of his daughter. 

“I stood there,” said ‘Umar, “feeling my way with the Messenger of God 
as to what was his state, and I said: ‘We were used to having, we men of 
Quraysh, the upper hand over our wives, but when we came to Medina we 
came unto a people whose wives have the upper hand over them,’ ” He saw 
a suggestion of a smile cross the Prophet’s face, so he went on to tell him 
what he had previously said to Hafsah by way of warning, and again the 



After Kbaybar Z79 

Prophet smiled, whereupon he ventured to sit down. Once more he was 
struck by the bareness of the room - a mat on the floor, three leather 
cushions, and nothing else. He suggested that the Prophet should allow 
himself more luxury, and by way of contrast he mentioned the Greeks and 
the Persians, but he was cut short with the words: “Art thou in any doubt, 
O son of Khattab? Their good things have been hastened on for them in 
this their earthly life.” 

It was now the time of the new moon, and the Prophet let it be known to 
his wives that he did not wish to see any of them until the month had 
passed. When the moon had altogether waned, he went first to ‘A’ishah’s 
apartment. Delighted to see him, yet surprised, she said to him: “It is but 
twenty-nine nights.” “How dost thou know?” he asked, and she 
answered: “I have been counting them - how I have counted them!” “But 
this was a month of twenty-nine,” he said. She had forgotten that a lunar 
month is sometimes only twenty-nine days instead of thirty. He then told 
her of another Revelation he had received, which made it necessary for him 
to put before her a choice between two possibilities. He said he had asked 
her father to help him by counselling her in this matter. “Nay,” said 
‘A’ishah, “none shall help thee with regard to me. But tell me what it is, O 
Messenger of God.” He answered saying: “God putteth before thee this 
choice,” and then he recited the newly revealed verses: O Prophet, say 
unto thy wives: If ye desire this lower life and its adornments, then come 
and I will bestow its goods upon you, and I will release you with a fair 
release. But if ye desire God and His messenger and the abode of the 
Hereafter, then verily God hath laid in store for you a meed immense, for 
such of you as do good.' She said: “Verily I desire God and His messenger 
and the abode of the Hereafter And there was not one of his wives who 
did not say the same. 


1 XXVIII, 18-9. 



LXXII 


The Lesser 
Pilgrimage and 
its Aftermath 

T HE months drew on until almost a year had passed since the signing 
of the treaty of Hudaybiyah. It was now time to set off for Mecca in 
accordance with the promise of Quraysh that the Prophet and his 
Companions should have safe access to the Holy Precinct in order to 
perform the rite of the Lesser Pilgrimage. There were about two thousand 
pilgrims in all, including the would-be pilgrims of the previous year, except 
for a few who had died or been killed in battle. Amongst those who had not 
been at Hudaybiyah was Abu Hurayrah, a man of the Bani Daws. 1 He had 
arrived in Medina with others of his tribe during the campaign of Khaybar, 
and being destitute he had joined the People of the Bench. On entering 
Islam his name had been changed to ‘Abd ar-Rahman, but he was always 
known as Abu Hurayrah, “the kitten man”, literally “the father of a 
kitten”, because like the Prophet he was very fond of cats and often had a 
kitten to play with. He soon found favour with the Prophet, who on this 
occasion put him in charge of some of the sacrificial camels. 

When they heard that the pilgrims had reached the edge of the sacred 
territory, Quraysh vacated the whole of the hollow of Mecca and with¬ 
drew to the tops of the surrounding hills. The chiefs of Quraysh were 
gathered together on Mount Abu Kubays, from which they could look 
down into the Mosque. They also had a wide view of the surrounding 
country; and now they saw the pilgrims emerge in a long file from the 
north-western pass which leads down into the valley just below the city. 
Their ears soon caught an indistinct murmur which quickly became 
distinguishable as the age-old pilgrim’s cry: Labbayk Allahumma Lab- 
bayk , Here I am, O God, at Thy service. 

The long procession of bare-headed, white-robed men was led by the 
Prophet mounted on Qaswa’, with ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah on foot, 
holding the bridle. Of the others some were on camelback and some on 
foot. They made straight for the Holy House by the nearest way. Each man 

1 See pp. 54-5. 



The Lesser Pilgrimage and its A ftermath 281 

was wearing his upper garment as a cloak, but at the entrance to the 
Mosque the Prophet adjusted his, passing it under his right arm, leaving 
the shoulder bare, and crossing the two ends over the left shoulder so that 
they hung down back and front. The others followed his example. Still 
mounted, he rode to the south-east corner of the Ka‘bah and reverently 
touched the Black Stone with his staff. Then he made the seven circuits of 
the House, after which he withdrew to the foot of the little hill of Safa, and 
passed to and fro between it and the hill of Marwah, seven courses in all, 
ending at Marwah, to which many of the sacrificial animals had now been 
led. There he sacrificed a camel, and his head was shaved by Khirash, who 
had done the same for him at Hudaybiyah. This completed the rite of the 
Lesser Pilgrimage. 

He then returned to the Mosque, intending to enter the Holy House, 
cluttered with idols though it was. But the doors were locked, and the key 
was with a member of the clan of ‘Abd ad-Dar. The Prophet sent a man to 
ask for it, but the chiefs of Quraysh replied that this was not in their 
agreement, the entry into the House not being part of the Pilgrimage rite. 
So none of the Muslims entered it that year; but when the sun had reached 
its zenith the Prophet told Bilal to go up to the roof of the Ka‘bah and make 
the call to prayer. His resonant voice filled the whole valley of Mecca and 
floated up to the tops of the hills, first with the magnification, then with the 
two testifications of Islam: “I bear witness that there is no god but God. I 
bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of God.” From Abu 
Kubays the chiefs of Quraysh could plainly distinguish Bilal, and they were 
outraged at the sight of the black slave on the roof of the Holy House. But 
above all they were conscious that this was a triumph for the enemy which 
might have incalculable repercussions, and they bitterly regretted having 
signed the treaty, which a year ago had seemed to be in their favour. 

The pilgrims spent three days in the evacuated city. The Prophet's tent 
was pitched in the Mosque. During the nights those of the Meccans who 
were Muslims in secret stole down from the hills, and there were many 
joyous encounters. ‘Abbas, whose Islam was tolerated by Quraysh, openly 
spent most of the three days with the Prophet. It was then that he offered 
him in marriage his wife’s sister Maymunah, now a widow, and the 
Prophet accepted. Maymunah and Umm al-Fadl were full sisters, and with 
them, living in the household of ‘Abbas, was their half-sister Salma, the 
widow of Hamzah, and her daughter ‘Umarah. ‘All suggested that their 
cousin, Hamzah’s daughter, should not be left amongst the idolaters, to 
which the Prophet and ‘Abbas agreed; and since Fatimah was one of the 
pilgrims it was arranged that she should take ‘Umarah with her in her 
howdah. 

When the three days were at an end, Suhayl and Huwaytib came down 
from Abu Kubays and said to the Prophet who was sitting with Sa‘d ibn 
‘Ubadah and others of the Helpers: “Thy time is finished, so begone from 
us.” The Prophet answered: “How would it harm you to give me some 
respite, that I may celebrate my marriage amongst you and prepare for you 
a feast?” “We need not thy feast,” they said. “Begone from us. We adjure 
thee by God, O Muhammad, and by the pact which is between us, to leave 
our country. This was the third night, which now is passed.” Sa‘d was 



282 Muhammad 


angry at their lack of courtesy, but the Prophet silenced him, saying: “O 
Sa‘d, no ill words to those who have come to visit us in our camp!” Then he 
gave orders that by nightfall every pilgrim should have left the city. But he 
made an exception for his servant, Abu Rafi\ whom he told to stay behind 
and bring Maymunah with him, which he did; and the marriage was 
consummated at Sarif, a few miles outside the Sacred Precinct. 

This new alliance established another unforeseen relationship with the 
enemy. Maymunah and Umm al-Fadl and their half-sisters Salma and 
Asma’ were all daughters of the same mother. But Maymunah and Umm 
al-Fadl had another half-sister on their father’s side, by name ‘Asma’, 1 
widow of the great Walid of Makhzum. It was she who had borne him 
Khalid, who had now become the Prophet’s nephew by marriage. 

One day soon after the return to Medina, the Prophet was woken from an 
afternoon siesta by the sound of a somewhat heated discussion. He 
recognised the voices of ‘Ali, Zayd and Ja‘far, and it was evident that they 
were all three at odds with each other. It was also evident that the more 
they argued, the further they were from reaching an agreement. Opening 
the door of the room he was in, he called them to him and asked what was 
the cause of their dispute. They exclaimed that it was a question of honour, 
as to which of them had most right to be the guardian of Hamzah’s 
daughter, who had been in ‘All’s house ever since her arrival from Mecca. 
“Come to me,” said the Prophet, “and I will judge between you.” When they 
were all seated he turned first to ‘Ali and asked him what he had to say for 
himself. “She is mine uncle’s daughter,” he said, “and it was I who brought 
her out from Mecca, and I have most right to her.” The Prophet then 
turned to Ja‘far, who said: “She is mine uncle’s daughter, and her mother’s 
sister is in my house.” His wife Asma’ was ‘Umarah’s maternal aunt. As to 
Zayd, he simply said “She is my brother’s daughter,” for the Prophet had 
made the pact of brotherhood between Hamzah and Zayd when they first 
came to Medina, and Hamzah had made a testament leaving Zayd in 
charge of his affairs. There was no doubt that each of the three was 
convinced that he had the best right to the honour in question. So before 
pronouncing his judgement the Prophet spoke words of praise to each one 
of them. It was then that he said to Ja‘far: “Thou art like me in looks and in 
character.” 2 Not until he saw that he had made each one of them happy did 
he voice his decision, which was in favour of Ja‘far. “Thou hast most right 
to her,” he said. “The mother’s sister is as a mother.” Ja‘far said nothing, 
but rose to his feet and circled around the Prophet with the steps of a 
dancer. “Ja‘far, what is this?” said the Prophet. He answered: “It is that 
which I have seen the Abyssinians do in honour of their kings. If ever the 
Negus gave a man a good reason to rejoice, that man would rise and dance 
about him.” 

It was not long before the Prophet arranged a marriage between 
‘Umarah and his own stepson, her cousin Salamah, whose father, Abu 

J Although transcribed by the same Latin letters, apart from diacritics, this name, 
beginning with ‘ayn and sad, differs considerably in sound from Asma’, which begins with 
alif and sin. 

i LS. 1 V/x, 24. 



The Lesser Pilgrimage and its Aftermath 2.8 3 

Salamah, was the son of Hamzah’s sister Barrah. On that occasion the 
Prophet said: “Have I now requited Salamah enough?” He meant that he 
was indebted to Salamah for having given him his mother Umm Salamah 
in marriage, and now in return he had given Salamah a bride. 

The Prophet’s entry into Mecca had been witnessed by the most eminent 
men of Quraysh. But there had been two notable exceptions: Khalid and 
‘Amr were not on Abu Qubays, nor were they encamped on any of the 
other hills above Mecca. Both had withdrawn from the city well in advance 
of the Prophet’s approach. Their decisions to absent themselves had been 
made independently, nor were their reasons for doing so the same. But on 
one point they were in complete agreement, namely that the treaty of 
Hudaybiyah had been a great moral victory for the Prophet, and that his 
entry into Mecca would prove to be the end of their resistance to him. But 
the hostility of ‘Amr against Islam had not diminished, whereas Khalid had 
for some years now been a man who is in two minds. Outwardly this had 
not been evident: his military prowess had thrust him to the fore in every 
action that Quraysh had taken against the Prophet. But he confessed 
afterwards that he had come away from Uhud and from the Trench with 
the uneasy feeling that the battle had been pointless and that Muhammad 
would triumph in the end; and when the Prophet had eluded his squadron 
on the way to Hudaybiyah, Khalid had exclaimed: “The man is inviolably 
protected!” That had been his last action against Islam. Then had come the 
amazing victory at Khaybar. 

But there were also considerations of a different kind: almost despite 
himself he had a personal liking for the Prophet; and from the letter that his 
younger brother Walid had written him before his death he had learned 
that the Prophet sometimes asked after him and that he had said: “If he 
would put his redoubtable vigour on the side of Islam against the idolaters 
it would be better for him; and we would give him preference over others.” 
To this Walid had added: “So see, my brother, what thou hast missed!” 

There was, in addition, an even closer family influence at work. Khalid’s 
mother, ‘Asma’, who had long been favourable to the Prophet, had 
recently entered Islam; and now his aunt Maymunah had become the 
Prophet’s wife. Not long after this marriage Khalid had a dream in which 
he was aware of being in a country which was shut in on all sides and 
extremely barren. Then he went out from this confinement into a land 
which was green and fertile, with pastures which stretched far and wide. 
He knew that this was something of a vision; and having divined the 
essence of its meaning, he made up his mind to go to Medina. But he 
preferred to go with a companion. Was there no one else of like mind with 
himself? Next to ‘Amr, who was not to be found, his nearest comrades in 
arms were ‘Ikrimah and Safwan. He sounded both of them, but Safwan 
said: “Even if every other man of Quraysh were to follow Muhammad, I 
would never follow him.” ‘Ikrimah said much the same; and Khalid 
remembered that both their fathers had been killed at Badr, where Safwan 
had lost also a brother. Regretfully he set out alone, but no sooner had he 
left his house than he fell in with ‘Uthman the son of Talhah of ‘Abd 
ad-Dar - the man who, years ago, had gallantly escorted Umm Salamah 



284 Muhammad, 

from Mecca to Medina. ‘Uthman was a close friend to Khalid, closer than 
either Safwan or ‘Ikrimah; but Khalid’s experience with the other two had 
made him reticent; and he remembered moreover that ‘Uthman had lost 
his father, two uncles and four brothers at Uhud. They rode on together in 
silence for a while. Then Khalid suddenly decided to speak, and with a 
searching look he said: “Our plight is no better than that of a fox in his 
earth. Pour in but a pail of water, and out he must come!” He immediately 
saw that ‘Uthman understood perfectly what he meant, so he told him 
where he was going and why; and ‘Uthman, who had been gradually 
coming to the same decision, now resolved to accompany him. Khalid 
gladly agreed to wait for him while he returned home for provisions and 
clothes; and early the next morning the two of them set off together for 
Medina. 

As to ‘Amr, he was of one mind with Safwan and ‘Ikrimah about Islam, 
but he saw more clearly than they did the precariousness of the situation; 
and gathering round him a few younger men, his clansmen of Sahm and 
others, who looked on him as a leader, he persuaded them to go with him 
to Abyssinia. He pointed out that if Muhammad triumphed in the 
inevitably imminent struggle for power then they would have safe asylum; 
and if Quraysh should triumph after all they could return to Mecca. “We 
had rather be under the Negus than under Muhammad,” he said, and they 
agreed. 

‘Amr was an astute politician, and a man of great perseverance, not 
easily discouraged. Despite his total failure to undermine the powerful 
impression which Ja‘far and his companions had made, he had none the 
less been at pains to appease the Negus as far as he was concerned, and had 
assiduously maintained relations with him throughout the years, always 
avoiding any mention of the Muslim refugees. But now they had left the 
country and gone to Medina; and with them would have gone, so ‘Amr 
wrongly concluded, all the Negus’s prejudice in favour of the new religion. 
At his first audience his rich gift of leather was graciously accepted, and the 
Negus seemed so well disposed that ‘Amr decided to come at once to the 
point and to ask for asylum. But in doing so he spoke slightingly of the 
Prophet, and this provoked a sudden overwhelming outburst of royal 
anger. ‘Amr was altogether taken aback: from what the Negus said it was 
clear that the best way for him to build a future for himself at his court - far 
better than gifts of leather — was to become a follower of Muhammad. He 
had fled from Islam only to find that Islam had outstripped him to the very 
refuge he had hoped to take; and with the ruin of his plans his resistance 
began to crumble. “Dost thou testify unto this, O King?” he said, meaning 
to the prophethood of Muhammad. “I bear witness to it before God,” said 
the Negus. “Do what I tell thee, O ‘Amr, and follow him. His is the truth, 
by God, and he will triumph over every persuasion that setteth itself 
against him, even as Moses triumphed over Pharaoh and his hosts.” 1 

History has not recorded the names of the companions of ‘Amr or what 
they decided to do. But ‘Amr himself boarded a boat which took him to a 
port on the Yemeni coast, where he bought a camel and provisions and set 


1 W.743- 



The Lesser Pilgrimage and its Aftermath 28 5 

off for the north; and when he reached Haddah, one of the first halts on the 
coastal route from Mecca to Medina, he came upon Khalid and ‘Uthman, 
and they travelled the rest of their way together. 

They were joyfully received in Medina, and Khalid said of the Prophet: 
“His face shone with light as he returned my greeting of Peace.” He was the 
first to pledge allegiance. “I bear witness that there is no god but God, and 
thou art the Messenger of God.” “Praise be to God who hath guided thee,” 
said the Prophet. “I ever saw in thee an intelligence which I hoped would 
not bring thee in the end to anything but good.” “O Messenger of God,” 
said Khalid, “thou didst see all those fields of battle whereon I took part 
against thee in obstinate resistance to the truth. Pray therefore unto God 
that He may forgive me them.” “Islam cutteth away all that went before 
it,” said the Prophet. “Even so much as that?” said Khalid, still visibly 
troubled in conscience; and the Prophet prayed: “O God forgive Khalid 
for all his obstructing of the way to Thy path.” 1 Then ‘Uthman and ‘Amr 
pledged their allegiance; and ‘Amr said afterwards that he had been quite 
unable to raise his eyes to the Prophet’s face, such was the reverence he felt 
for him at that moment. 

‘Umar’s cousin Hisham, 2 the brother of ‘Amr, had escaped from Mecca 
to Medina shortly after the battle of the Trench. Since then he had been 
joined by his nephew ‘Abd Allah, the son of ‘Amr. ‘Abd Allah, now in his 
sixteenth year, was deeply devout and much given to fasting. He also 
showed promise of being one of the most learned of the Companions, and 
recorded many of the sayings of the Prophet, who gave him permission to 
write them down. Both ‘Abd Allah and Hisham had prayed for the Islam of 
‘Amr, and his reunion with them in Medina was a matter of great rejoicing 
both for them and for him. 

Two other events of joy in these months were the Islam of ‘Aqil, the 
brother of Ja‘far and ‘Air, and of Jubayr, the son of Mut‘im. The faith 
which had taken root in Jubayr’s heart when he had come to ransom some 
of the captives of Badr was now a growth which could not be set aside. To 
‘Aqil, when he came to pledge his allegiance, the Prophet said: “I love thee 
with two loves, for thy near kinship unto me, and for the love which I ever 
saw for thee in mine uncle.” 3 


1 W. 741-9. 


1 Seepp. 114-15. 


I.S. IV/z, 30. 


LXXIII 


Deaths and the 
Promise of a Birth 

T HE earlier half of this same year of rejoicing, the eighth year after 
the Hijrah, was also a time of bereavement. The first of the deaths in 
the household of the Prophet was that of his daughter Zaynab. He 
was with her at the end and spoke words of comfort to his son-in law and 
little granddaughter. Then he gave instructions to Umm Ayman, together 
with Sawdah and Umm Salamah, to make ready the body for burial. When 
the ablutions had been performed, the Prophet took off an undergarment 
he was wearing, and told them to wrap her in it before they shrouded her. 
Then he led the funeral prayer, and prayed also beside her grave. 

Khadljah was the only one of his wives who had borne him children. The 
people of Medina longed that a child should be born to the Prophet in their 
city. Only two of his present wives - Umm Salamah and Umm Habibah - 
had borne children to their first husbands. But at each new marriage the 
citizens were filled with fresh hopes, which gradually faded, for not one of 
the later wives was destined to be the mother of a child to the Prophet. Yet 
now, shortly after the death of his eldest daughter, it appeared that he was 
again to become a father. Mariyah, his Coptic bondmaid, was expecting a 
child. She was already a centre of attention for the people of Medina who 
knew well the Prophet’s affection for her, and who sought to please him by 
their kindness to her; and now their attentiveness was redoubled. 

About three months after his return from the Lesser Pilgrimage the Prophet 
sent fifteen men to act as peaceful messengers of Islam to one of the tribes 
on the borders of Syria; but their friendly greetings were met by a shower 
of arrows, and having been obliged to fight they were all killed but one. 

There was another setback, smaller in that it involved only a single 
death, but of greater political import. The Prophet had previously sent 
Dihyah Al-Kalbi to the governor of Bostra with his letter to Caesar, which 
had remained unanswered. A second messenger to Bostra was now 
intercepted by a chief of the tribe of Ghassan and put to death. Such an act 
could not be allowed to go unpunished, despite the risk that the Ghassa- 
nids, who were mainly Christian, might be able to persuade Caesar’s 
representative to send them help. 

The Prophet mustered an army of three thousand men and put Zayd in 



Deaths and the Promise of a Birth 287 

command of them, with instructions that if Zayd should be killed Ja‘far 
should take his place. ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah was named as third in 
order of precedence. If these three should all be incapacitated, the men 
were to follow a commander of their own choosing. The Prophet then gave 
Zayd a white standard, and with others of his Companions he accom¬ 
panied the army to where the ground rises up towards the Pass of Fare¬ 
well, an opening between the hills a little to the north of Uhud. 

‘Abd Allah had with him, on the back of his saddle, an orphan boy 
whose guardian he was. On the way the boy heard him reciting some verses 
he had composed, expressing the desire to be left behind in Syria when the 
army returned home. “When I heard these verses I wept,” said the boy, 
“and he flicked me with his whip and said: ‘What harm to thee, wretched 
fellow, if God grant me martyrdom and I have rest from this world and its 
toil and its cares and its sorrows and its accidents, and thou returnest safe 
in the saddle?’ After that, during a halt in the night, he prayed two prayer 
cycles followed by a long supplication. Then he called me and I said: ‘Here 
I am, at thy service.’ ‘If God will,’ he said, ‘it is martyrdom.’’ n 

When the army reached the Syrian border they heard that not only had 
the northern tribes come out in considerable strength, but that Caesar’s 
representative had greatly reinforced them with imperial troops. 
Altogether the enemy were said to be a hundred thousand strong. Allowing 
for the probability of gross exaggeration, Zayd none the less decided to 
halt and to hold a council of war. Most of the men were in favour of 
sending immediately to inform the Prophet of this grave turn of events. 
Then he could either order them home or give them auxiliaries. But ‘Abd 
Allah spoke vigorously against any such course. Using the same unanswer¬ 
able argument which had been used before Uhud, and which was to be 
used again and again in the future, he ended his speech with the words: 
“We have before us the certainty of one of two good things, either victory 
or martyrdom - to join our brethren and be their companions in the 
gardens of Paradise, On then to the attack!” 

‘Abd Allah’s resolution prevailed, and the army continued its northward 
advance. They were now not far from the southern end of the Dead Sea, 
separated from its long and deep valley by the range of hills which rises up 
from its eastern shores. A few hours’ march brought them within sight of 
the enemy. Whatever the exact numbers of the combined Arab and 
Byzantine forces, the Muslims could see at a glance that they themselves 
were vastly outnumbered, on a scale which they had never yet experienced. 
Nor had any of them witnessed before such military splendour as that of 
the imperial squadrons which formed the centre of the host, with the Arabs 
on either flank. The pomp of Quraysh as they had descended the hill of 
‘Aqanqal at Badr had been as nothing to the wealth of arms and armour 
and the richly caparisoned horses which now met their eyes. Their 
approach moreover had been anticipated, and the legions were ready for 
them, drawn up in battle formation. 

Wishing to avoid an immediate engagement, for the slope of the land 
was against them, Zayd gave orders to withdraw southwards to Mu’tah, 


1 W.759. 



z88 Muhammad 


where they would have the advantage, and there they consolidated their 
position. The enemy, conscious of the great superiority of their numbers 
and bent on making it an altogether decisive day, followed them to 
Mu’tah. As they drew near, instead of retreating further as they had 
expected, Zayd gave the order to attack. 

At that moment the space between Mu’tah and Medina was folded up 
for the Prophet and he saw Zayd with the white standard leading his men 
into battle. He saw him many times mortally wounded until finally he fell 
to the ground, and Ja‘far took the standard and fought until his life also 
flowed out from his wounds. Then ‘Abd Allah took the standard and the 
attack which he led against the enemy was repulsed with a vigorous 
onslaught in which he too was killed and his men driven back in disarray. 
Another Helper, Thabit ibn Arqam, seized the standard and the Muslims 
rallied, whereupon he gave it to Khalid who at first refused the honour 
saying that Thabit had more right to it. “Take it man,” said Thabit; “I did 
but take it to give it thee.” So Khalid took command and knit the ranks 
together, and the enemy advance was so firmly checked that they drew 
back enough to enable the Muslims to beat an orderly retreat. It was a 
victory for the other side, but they gained no advantage from it; and of the 
Muslims, apart from their three leaders, only five were killed. It was thus 
something of a victory for Khalid; and when the Prophet told his Compan¬ 
ions of the battle and of the deaths of Zayd and Ja‘far and ‘Abd Allah he 
said: “Then one of God’s swords took the standard, and God opened up 
the way for them” - that is, for the Muslims to reach safety; and thus it was 
that Khalid came to be called “the Sword of God”. 

As the Prophet described the battle the tears were flowing down his 
cheeks, and when the time came for the prayer he led it and immediately 
withdrew from the Mosque instead of turning to face the congregation as 
was his wont. He did the same again at sunset, and yet again after the night 
prayer. 

Meantime he had been to the house of Ja‘far. “O Asma’,” he said, “bring 
me Ja‘far’s sons.” With some misgivings at the gravity of his face she 
fetched the three boys. The Prophet kissed them, and then again his eyes 
filled with tears and he wept. “O Messenger of God,” she said, “dearer 
than my father and my mother, what maketh thee weep? Hath news 
reached thee of Ja‘far and his companions?” “Even so,” he said. “They 
were struck down this day.” She uttered a cry of lamentation, and women 
hastened to her side. The Prophet returned to his house, and ordered food 
to be prepared for the family of Ja‘far during the next days. “Their grief 
doth busy them”, he said, “beyond caring for their own needs.” 

Umm Ayman and Usamah and the rest of Zayd’s family were in his 
house. He had already condoled with them; and as he returned, Zayd’s 
little daughter came out into the street in tears, and seeing him she ran into 
his arms. He now wept unrestrainedly, and as he clasped the child to him 
his body shook with sobs. Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah happened to pass by at that 
moment and searching in himself for words of comfort, he murmured: “O 
Messenger of God, what is this?” “This,” said the Prophet, “is one who 
loveth yearning for his beloved.” 1 

1 I.S. 111/1,32. 



Deaths and the Promise of a Birth 289 

That night the Prophet had a vision of Paradise, and he saw that Zayd 
was there, and Ja‘far and ‘Abd Allah and the other martyrs of the battle; 
and he saw Ja'far flying with wings like an Angel. At dawn he went to the 
Mosque; his Companions sensed that the weight of his sorrow had left 
him; and after the prayer he turned as usual to face the congregation. Then 
he went again to Asma’, to tell her of his vision; and she was greatly 
consoled. 

When Khalid and his men returned to Medina the Prophet called for his 
white mule, Duldul, which the Muqawqis had given him, and putting 
JaTar’s eldest boy in front of him on the saddle he rode out to meet them. 
Many men and women had already lined the route, and as the troops 
passed they jeered at them and threw dust in their faces. “Runaways,” they 
shouted. “Did ye flee from fighting in God’s path?” “Nay,” said the 
Prophet, “they are not runaways but returners again to the fight, if God 
will.” 1 

The setback at Mu’tah was an encouragement to the northern Arabs to 
strengthen their resistance to the new Islamic state, and in the following 
month news came that the tribes of Bali and Quda‘ah were massing in 
considerable numbers on the Syrian border, with intent to march south. 
But this time there appeared to be no question of reinforcements from 
Caesar. The Prophet sent ‘Amr at the head of three hundred men, with 
instructions to fight where necessary and to win allies where possible. The 
choice of commander may have been partly determined by the close ties of 
kinship which ‘Amr had with one of the tribes in question, for his mother 
was a woman of Bali. By dint of night marches and relatively secluded 
camps he avoided attracting undue attention, and reached the Syrian 
border in ten days. Winter had set in early that year and unaccustomed to 
being so far north, the men of Mecca and Medina set about gathering 
firewood as soon as they had made their final halt. But ‘Amr forbade the 
lighting of a single fire; and grumblers were silenced with the words; “Ye 
were ordered to hear me and obey me; therefore do so.” 

Quickly realising that the enemy were in greater numbers than had been 
anticipated, and that there was little hope, for the moment, of local 
assistance, he sent back a man of Juhaynah to the Prophet asking for 
reinforcements. Abu ‘Ubaydah was immediately dispatched with an addi¬ 
tional two hundred men. As one of the closest Companions, and one who 
moreover had fought in every campaign, he expected to take precedence; 
but ‘Amr insisted that the newcomers were merely an auxiliary force and 
that he himself was commander-in-chief. The Prophet had told Abu 
‘Ubaydah to see that there was perfect co-operation and no division 
between the two forces, so the older man gave way, saying to ‘Amr: “In 
case thou shouldst disobey me , by God I will obey thee.” When the 
Prophet heard of this, he invoked blessings upon Abu ‘Ubaydah. 

‘Amr now led his five hundred men across the Syrian border, and as they 
advanced the enemy dispersed. There was only one brief exchange of 
arrows; for the rest, it was a question of coming upon deserted camps 
whose very recent occupants had vanished; and in the absence of the 
hostile clans, friendly elements — individuals and groups - ventured to 

1 W.765. 


z$o Muhammad 


manifest themselves. So ‘Amr was able to claim, in a letter to the Prophet, 
that he had re-established the influence of Islam upon the Syrian frontier. 

That influence was now rapidly growing throughout the tribes on all 
sides of the Yathrib oasis. The reasons were not purely spiritual: the 
Prophet was now known as a dangerous and incalculable enemy and as a 
powerful, reliable and generous ally; by comparison, other alliances were 
beginning to seem less attractive and more hazardous. In many cases the 
political and religious motives were inextricably connected; but there was 
also a factor, slow-working yet powerful and profound, which had 
nothing whatsoever to do with politics, and which was also largely 
independent of the deliberate efforts made by the believers to spread the 
message of Islam. This was the remarkable serenity which characterised 
those who practised the new religion. The Koran, the Book of God’s 
Oneness, was also the Book of Mercy and the Book of Paradise. The 
recitation of its verses, combined with the teaching of the Messenger, 
imbued the believers with the certainty that they had within easy reach, 
that is through the fulfilment of certain conditions well within their 
capacity, the eternal satisfaction of every possible desire. The resulting 
happiness was a criterion of faith. The Prophet insisted: “All is well with 
the faithful, whatever the circumstances.” 1 

1 N. XXI, 13. 



LXXIV 


A Breach of the 
Armistice 

D ESPITE the treaty, some of the men of Bakr were still determined 
to prolong their feud with Khuza‘ah; and not long after the 
campaign of ‘Arar to Syria, a clan of Bakr made a night raid against 
Khuza‘ah, one of whom was killed. In the fighting which ensued, some of 
which took place inside the sacred territory, Quraysh helped their allies 
with weapons; and one or two men of Quraysh took part in the fighting 
under cover of darkness. The Bani Ka‘b of Khuza‘ah immediately sent a 
deputation to Medina to inform the Prophet of what had happened and to 
ask for his help. He told them they could rely on him, and sent them back to 
their territory. When they had gone, he went to ‘A’ishah, who could see 
from his face that he was in great anger. He asked for some water to 
perform his ablution, and she heard him say as he poured it over himself: 
“May I not be helped if I help not the sons of Ka‘b.”’ 

Meantime the Meccans were exceedingly troubled as to the possible 
consequences of what had happened, and they sent Abu Sufyan to pacify 
the Prophet, if need be. On his way, he met the men of Khuza‘ah returning 
home and he feared he was too late. His fears were increased by the 
inscrutable demeanour of the Prophet. “O Muhammad,” he said, “I was 
absent at the time of the truce of Hudaybiyah, so let us now strengthen the 
pact and prolong its duration.” The Prophet parried his request with the 
query: “Hath aught befallen to break it on your side?” “God forbid!” said 
Abu Sufyan uneasily. “We likewise,” said the Prophet, “are keeping to the 
truce for the period agreed upon at Hudaybiyah. We will not modify it, 
neither will we accept another in its place.” He was clearly not prepared to 
say more, so Abu Sufyan went to see his daughter, Umm Hablbah, hoping 
she might agree to intervene on his behalf. They had not met for fifteen 
years. The best place to sit was the Prophet’s rug, but as he was about to 
take his seat she hastily folded it up from beneath him. “Little daughter,” 
he said, “is this rug too good for me, thinkest thou, or am I too good for 
it?” “It is the Prophet’s rug,” she said, “and thou art an idolater, a man 
unpurified.” Then she added: “My father, thou art lord of Quraysh and 
their chief. How is it that thou hast failed to enter Islam, and that thou 


1 W.791. 



z$z Muhammad 

worshippest stones which neither hear nor see?” “Wonder of wonders,” 
he said, “am I to forsake what my fathers worshipped to follow the religion 
of Muhammad?” And, feeling that no help was to be expected from her, he 
went to Abu Bakr and others of the Companions to ask them to intercede 
on his behalf for a renewal of the pact, for he was now sure, although the 
Prophet had not said so, that he considered the pact to have been 
abrogated by the recent fighting. But it would serve the same purpose as a 
renewal of the pact, that is, it would prevent bloodshed, if some man of 
influence would grant a general protection between man and man. Abu 
Sufyan suggested this alternative to Abu Bakr but he merely answered: “I 
grant protection only within the scope of protection granted by the 
Messenger of God.” 

Others replied much the same, and finally Abu Sufyan went to the house 
of ‘All, making much of their kinship, for they were both great-grandsons 
of the two brothers Hashim and ‘Abdu Shams. But ‘All said: “Alas for 
thee, Abu Sufyan! The Messenger of God hath resolved not to grant thy 
request; and none can speak to him in favour of a thing when he is averse to 
it.” For the Companions knew well that the Revelation had said to the 
Prophet: Consult them about affairs ; and when thou art resolved , then 
trust in Godf and they had come to know by experience that when the 
Prophet had reached the degree of resolution he had clearly reached on this 
occasion it was useless to seek to deter him. Abu Sufyan now turned to 
Fatimah, who was present, with Hasan sitting on the floor in front of her. 
“O daughter of Muhammad,” he said, “bid thy little son grant protection 
between man and man, that he may become for ever the lord of the Arabs.” 
But Fatimah replied that boys do not grant protection, and Abu Sufyan 
turned again to ‘All in desperation and begged him to suggest some course 
of action. “I see nothing for it”, said ‘All, “but that thou thyself shouldst 
rise and grant protection between man and man. Thou art lord of 
Kinanah.” “Would that avail me aught?” said Abu Sufyan. “By God, I 
think not so,” said ‘All, “but I find naught else for thee to do.” So Abu 
Sufyan went to the Mosque and said in a loud voice: “Behold, I grant 
protection between man and man, and I do not think that Muhammad will 
fail to uphold me.” Then he went to the Prophet and said: “O Mu¬ 
hammad, I do not think thou wilt disavow my protection.” But the 
Prophet merely answered: “That is what thou thinkest, O Abu Sufyan;” 2 
and the Umayyad chief returned to Mecca with great misgivings. 

The Prophet began to prepare for a campaign, and Abu Bakr asked if he 
also should make ready. The Prophet said he should and told him that they 
were going out against Quraysh. “Must we not wait for the time of the 
truce to run out?” said Abu Bakr. “They have betrayed us and broken the 
pact,” said the Prophet, “and I shall attack them. But keep secret what I 
have told thee. Let one thinker think that God’s Messenger is for Syria, and 
let another think he is for Thaqlf, and another for Hawazin. O God, take 
from Quraysh all sight of us, and all tidings of us, what we are about, that 
we may come suddenly upon them in their land.” 

In answer to this prayer word came to him from Heaven that one of the 


1 111,159. 


2 I.I. 807-8; W. 794. 


A Breach of the Armistice 293 

Emigrants, Hatib by name, had somehow learned the secret and had sent a 
letter to Quraysh to warn them of the impending attack. He had given it to 
a woman of Muzaynah who was travelling to Mecca, and she had hidden it 
in her hair. The Prophet sent ‘All and Zubayr after her, and having failed to 
find the letter in her baggage they threatened to search her if she did not 
produce it. So she gave them the letter and they took it to the Prophet, who 
sent for the writer of it. “What made thee do this, O Hatib?” he said. “O 
Messenger of God,” he answered, “I am indeed a believer in God and His 
Messenger. I have not changed my belief, and naught else hath taken its 
place. But I am a man without standing amongst the people of Mecca, 
without kinsmen of influence; and for the sake of my son and my family 
who are there in their midst I sought to win their favour.” “O Messenger of 
God,” said ‘Umar, “let me strike off his head. The man is a hypocrite.” But 
the Prophet said to him: “How knowest thou, O ‘Umar, that God hath not 
looked upon the men of Badr and said: ‘Do what ye will, for I have forgiven 
you?’” 1 

The Prophet now sent messengers to those of the tribes whom he felt he 
could now rely on for help, with a general summons to be present in 
Medina at the beginning of the next month, which was Ramadan. The 
Bedouin faithfully responded; and when the appointed day came the army 
was the largest that had ever set out from Medina. No able-bodied Muslim 
stayed behind. The Emigrants were seven hundred, with three hundred 
horse; the Helpers were four thousand, with five hundred horse; and the 
tribes, including those who joined them on the way, brought the total 
numbers up to nearly ten thousand men. The cavalry rode on camelback, 
leading their horses; and except for a few of the closest Companions none 
of them knew who the enemy were. 

When they were about half-way they were met by ‘Abbas and Umm 
al-Fadl and their sons. ‘Abbas had decided that it was now time for them to 
leave Mecca and to live in Medina. The Prophet invited them to join his 
expedition, which they did, to the joy of Maymunah, who had come with 
the Prophet. 

Umm Salamah was also with the Prophet; and at one of the next halts 
she was told that two men of Quraysh were in the camp and wished to 
speak with her. One of them was her half-brother ‘Abd Allah, the son of 
her father and the Prophet’s aunt ‘Atikah; the other was a son of the 
Prophet’s eldest uncle Harith, the poet Abu Sufyan, a one-time nurseling of 
Hallmah. He had with him his small son Ja‘far. Both men had been close to 
the Prophet until the Revelation came, when they turned against him. Now 
they had come to seek his forgiveness, and to ask Umm Salamah to 
intercede for them. She went to the Prophet and said: “Thy wife’s brother, 
son of thine aunt, is here, and thine uncle’s son who is thy foster-brother.” 
But he said: “I have no call to see them. As to my brother - he meant her 
brother ‘Abd Allah - he said unto me what he said in Mecca; 2 and as to 
mine uncle’s son, he hath brought dishonour upon me.” Abu Sufyan had 
satirised him in his poems. She pleaded for them, but to no effect, and when 
she told them this, Abu Sufyan said: “Either he shall see me or I will take 


1 1.1. 809—10. 


2 See p. 62 . 



294 Muhammad 

my son by the hand and go out into the desert until we die of thirst and 
hunger. And thou” - he meant the Prophet - “art the most long-suffering 
of men, even apart from my kinship with thee.” When she repeated this 
to the Prophet he relented 1 and agreed to receive them in his tent, where 
they both uttered their professions of faith; and both made good their 
Islam. 

During the march on one of these days the Prophet saw a bitch lying by 
the side of the road with a litter of recently born pups which she was 
feeding, and he was afraid that she might be molested by one or another of 
the men. So he told Ju‘ayl of Damrah to stand on guard beside her until 
every contingent had passed. 2 The name Ju‘ayl still clung to him, despite 
the new name of ‘ Amr which the Prophet had given him. 

In Qudayd the army was joined by the Bani Sulaym, a troop of cavalry 
nine hundred strong. “O Messenger of God,” said one of their spokesmen, 
“thou thinkest we are dissemblers, and_yet we are thy maternal uncles” - 
he was referring to Hashim’s mother, ‘Atikah, who was a woman of their 
tribe - “so we have come unto thee that thou mayest put us to the test. We 
are steadfast in war, gallant at the encounter, horsemen firm in the saddle.” 

Like those who had come with the main force from Medina, they had 
brought their standards and their pennants unmounted and furled. They 
now asked the Prophet to mount them and to give them to men of his own 
choice from amongst them; but the time had not yet come for the flying of 
flags. Nor did he yet tell them where they were going. 

At the outset the Prophet had sent a man through the army to proclaim: 
“He that would keep his fast, let him keep it, and he that would break his 
fast, let him break it,” In case of travel in Ramadan it was permissible to 
break the fast, provided that the full number of days missed were fasted 
later. The Prophet himself and many others fasted until they were within a 
certain distance of the sacred territory; then he gave orders to break the 
fast; and when they had encamped at Marr az-Zahran he let it be known 
that the reason for breaking the fast had been to gather up their strength 
for meeting the enemy. This aroused the curiosity of some of the men to 
breaking-point. From Marr az-Zahran, Mecca could be reached in one 
long day’s march, and easily in two. But in view of the truce it was unlikely 
that they had come out against Quraysh. Their camp was also on the way 
to the territory of the hostile tribes of Hawazin. Or could it be that having 
gained possession of the northern garden of the Hijaz, the Prophet was 
now bent on capturing its southern garden, the hitherto impregnable Ta’if, 
the centre of the worship of al-Lat? 

Seeing that the question “Who are the enemy?” was being passed from 
man to man throughout the host, Ka‘b ibn Malik volunteered to go to the 
Prophet and ask him. He did not however venture to put the question 
directly, but going to where the Prophet was seated outside his tent he knelt 
in front of him and recited four melodious verses he had just composed for 
the occasion. The gist of these was that the men had reached the point of 
drawing their swords and interrogating them as to what enemy their edges 
were destined for, and that if the swords could have spoken they too would 


1 W. 8 n. 


2 W. 804. 



A Breach of the Armistice 295 

have put the same question. But the Prophet’s only answer was a smile, and 
Ka‘b had to return to the men with nothing achieved. 

Their desire to know their own destination was no more than idle 
curiosity as compared with the eagerness of Quraysh and Hawazin to 
know the answer to the same question. The great tribe of Hawazin were 
spread mainly over the slopes of the hill country which dominated the 
southern extremity of the plain of Najd. Ta’if was on one of these slopes, 
and it was Thaqif, the inhabitants of Ta’if and guardians of its temple, who 
took the initiative of sending an urgent message to all their fellow clans of 
Hawazin that an army of ten thousand was on its way south from Yathrib, 
and that they must be prepared for the worst. Most of the clans immediate¬ 
ly responded, and troops began to assemble at a point of vantage to the 
north of Ta’if. 

As to Quraysh, although they would have liked to think that Ta’if was in 
danger rather than Mecca, they were conscious of having broken the pact. 
This, together with the Prophet’s refusal to renew it, made them apprehen¬ 
sive almost to the point of despair. The Prophet was aware of this, and in 
order to increase their fears he ordered his men to spread out and each 
man to light a fire after dark. From the outskirts of the sacred territory ten 
thousand camp-fires could now be seen burning, and news was quickly 
brought to Mecca that Muhammad’s army was far larger than they had 
feared. After a hurried consultation Quraysh accepted the offer of Abu 
Sufyan to go out and speak to the Prophet again. With him went Hakim, 
Khadljah’s nephew, who had done his best to stop the battle of Badr, and 
Budayl of Khuza‘ah, who had helped the Prophet at Hudaybiyah and who 
had recently accompanied some of his clansmen to Medina in connection 
with the rupture of the pact. As they approached the camp, already within 
earshot of the grumbling of the camels, they saw a man on a white mule 
coming apparently to meet them. It was ‘Abbas, who had slipped out of the 
camp, hoping to find someone on his way to the city who could take a 
message for him to Quraysh. It was imperative, he thought, that they 
should send a deputation to the Prophet before it was too late. When they 
had recognised and greeted each other, ‘Abbas took them to the tent of the 
Prophet, and Abu Sufyan said: “O Muhammad, thou hast come with a 
strange assortment of men - some known and some unknown - against 
thy kindred.” But the Prophet cut him short. “It is thou who art the 
transgressor,” he said. “Ye broke the pact of Hudaybiyah, and abetted the 
attack on the Bani Ka‘b, thereby sinfully violating the holy precinct of God 
and His Sanctuary. Abu Sufyan sought to change the subject somewhat. 
“Alas,” he said, “hadst thou but turned thine anger and thy strategy 
against Hawazin! For they are further from thee in kinship, and fiercer in 
enmity against thee.” “I hope”, said the Prophet, “that my Lord will grant 
me all of that - by victory over Mecca, by the triumph therein of Islam, and 
by the rout of Hawazin — and that He will enrich me with their goods as 
plunder and their families as captives.” Then he said to the three men: 
“Bear witness that there is no god but God, and that I am the Messenger of 
God.” Hakim and Budayl thereupon made their professions of faith, but 
Abu Sufyan testified “there is no god but God” and then was silent. When 
told to pronounce the second testification he said: “O Muhammad, there 



29 6 Muhammad 

is still in my soul a scruple about this; give her a respite.” So the Prophet 
told his uncle to take them to his tent for the night. At dawn the call to 
prayer was made throughout the camp, and Abu Sufyan was greatly 
shaken by the sound of it. “What are they about?” he said. “The prayer,” 
said ‘Abbas. “And how often do they pray each day and night?” said Abu 
Sufyan, and when told that the prayers were five he said: “By God, it is too 
much!” Then he saw the men eagerly crowding and jostling each other that 
they might be splashed with water from the Prophet’s ablution, or have 
some drops of what was left from it, and he said: “O Abu 1 -Fadl, I have 
never seen such sovereignty as this.” “Out upon thee!” said ‘Abbas. 
“Believe!” “Take me to him,” said Abu Sufyan, and after the prayer 
‘Abbas took him again to the Prophet and he testified to his prophethood, 
that he was indeed the Messenger of God. ‘Abbas took the Prophet aside 
and said: “O Messenger of God, well knowest thou the love of Abu Sufyan 
for honour and glory. Grant him therefore some favour.” “I will,” said the 
Prophet, and going to the Umayyad chief he told him to return to Quraysh 
and say to them: “Whoso entereth the house of Abu Sufyan shall be safe, 
and whoso locketh upon himself his door shall be safe, and whoso entereth 
the Mosque shall be safe.” 



LXXV 


The Conquest of 
Mecca 

T HE tents had already been loaded on to the transport camels, and 
the Prophet had at last called for the standards and pennants to be 
brought to him. These he mounted one by one, placing each in the 
hand of the bearer he had chosen for it. He told ‘Abbas to accompany Abu 
Sufyan as far as the narrow end of the valley, and keep him there, so that he 
could see for himself the size of the army as it passed. There would be time 
enough for him then to return to Quraysh and deliver his message, for a 
single man could reach Mecca by a more direct way than the army would 
take. 

“Who is that?” said Abu Sufyan, pointing to the man at the head of the 
host which now came in sight. “Khalid the son of Walld,” said ‘Abbas; and 
when he came level with them Khalid uttered three magnifications, Allahu 
Akbar. With Khalid were the horse of Sulaym. They were followed by the 
yellow-turbaned Zabayr at the head of a troop of five hundred Emigrants 
and others. He likewise uttered three magnifications as he passed Abu 
Sufyan, and the whole valley resounded as with one voice his men echoed 
him. Troop after troop went by, and at the passing of each Abu Sufyan 
asked who they were, and each time he marvelled, either because the tribe 
in question had hitherto been far beyond the range of influence of 
Quraysh, or because it had recently been hostile to the Prophet, as was the 
case with the Ghatafanite clan of Ashja‘, one of whose ensigns was borne 
by Nu‘aym, the former friend of himself and Suhayl. 

“Of all the Arabs,” said Abu Sufyan, “these were Muhammad’s bit¬ 
terest foes.” “God caused Islam to enter their hearts,” said ‘Abbas. “All 
this is by the grace of God.” 

The last of the squadrons was the Prophet’s own, consisting entirely of 
Emigrants and Helpers. The glint of their steel gave them a greenish-black 
appearance, for they were fully armed and armoured, only their eyes being 
visible. The Prophet had given his standard to Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah, who led 
the van; and as he passed the two men at the side of the route he called out: 
“O Abu Sufyan, this is the day of slaughter! The day when the inviolable 
shall be violated! The day of God’s abasement of Quraysh.” The Prophet 
was in the midst of the troop, mounted on Qaswa’, and on either side of 
him were Abu Bakr and Usayd, with whom he was conversing. “O 



z$8 Muhammad 

Messenger of God,” cried Abu Sufyan when he came within earshot, “hast 
thou commanded the slaying of thy people?” — and he repeated to him 
what Sa‘d had said. “I adjure thee by God,” he added, “on behalf of thy 
people, for thou art of all men the greatest in filial piety, the most merciful, 
the most beneficent!” “This is the day of mercy,” said the Prophet, “the 
day on which God hath exalted Quraysh.” Then ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn 
‘Awf and ‘Uthman said to him, for they were close at hand: “O Messenger 
of God, we are not sure of Sa‘d, that he will not make a sudden violent 
attack upon Quraysh.” So the Prophet sent word to Sa‘d to give the 
standard to his son Qays, a man of relatively mild temperament, and to let 
him lead the squadron. To honour the son was to honour the father, and in 
the hand of Qays the standard would still be with Sa‘d. But Sa‘d refused to 
hand it over without direct command from the Prophet, who thereupon 
unwound the red turban from his helmet and sent it to Sa‘d as a token. The 
standard was immediately given to Qays. 

When the army had passed, Abu Sufyan went back to Mecca with all 
speed and standing outside his house he shouted at the top of his voice to a 
quickly gathering crowd: “O men of Quraysh, Muhammad is here with a 
force ye cannot resist. Muhammad is here with ten thousand men of steel. 
And he hath granted me that whoso entereth my house shall be safe.” Hind 
now came out of the house and seized her husband by his moustaches. 
“Slay this greasy good-for-nothing bladder of a man,” she cried. “Thou 
miserable protector of a people!” “Woe betide you,” he shouted, “let not 
this woman deceive you against your better judgement, for there hath 
come unto you that which ye cannot resist. But whoso entereth the house 
of Abu Sufyan shall be safe.” “God slay thee!” they said. “What good is 
thy house for all our numbers?” “And whoso locketh upon himself his 
door shall be safe,” he answered, “and whoso entereth the Mosque shall be 
safe,” whereupon the crowd that had gathered dispersed, some to their 
houses and some to the Mosque. 

The army halted at Dhu Tuwa, which is not far from the city and within 
sight of it. This was the place where two years previously Khalid had been 
stationed to bar their approach. But now there was no sign of any 
resistance. It was as if the city were empty, as it had been at their visit the 
previous year. But this time there was no three-day limit to their stay; and 
when Qaswa’ came to a halt the Prophet bowed his head until his beard 
almost touched the saddle, in gratitude to God. He then drew up his 
troops, putting Khalid in command of the right and Zubayr in command 
of the left. His own troop which was now in the centre he divided into two; 
half of it was to be led by Sa‘d and his son, and the other half, in which he 
himself would ride, was to be led by Abu ‘Ubaydah. When the order was 
given they were to divide and to enter the city from four directions, Khalid 
from below and the others from the hills through three different passes. 

High above the gathered host, on the slopes of Mount Abu Qubays, 
were two figures which a keen sight could have distinguished as a 
somewhat bent old man with a staff, guided and helped by a woman. They 
were Abu Quhafah and Quraybah, the father and sister of Abu Bakr. That 
morning, when the news came of the Prophet’s arrival in Dhu Tuwa, the 
blind old man had told his daughter to guide him up the mount and tell him 


The Conquest of Mecca Z99 

what she could see. As a young and vigorous man he had climbed the hills 
on the other side of Mecca to see the army of Abrahah and his elephant. 
Now he was old, and had been blind for many years; but he would at least 
have a sight, through the eyes of his daughter, of this host of ten thousand 
in which were his son and two grandsons. Quraybah described what she 
could see as a dense mass of black, and he told her that those were the 
horsemen drawn up in close formation, waiting for orders. Then she saw 
the black mass spreading out until it became four distinct divisions, and 
her father told her to take him home with all speed. They were still on their 
way when a troop of horse swept past them, and one man leaned over from 
his saddle and snatched the silver necklace that Quraybah was wearing. 
Otherwise they suffered no harm and reached home in safety. 

They had not been alone on Abu Qubays. At another part of the mount 
‘Ikrimah, Safwan and Suhayl had gathered a force of Quraysh together 
with some of their allies of Bakr and Hudhayl. They were determined to 
fight; and when they saw Khalid’s troop making for the lower entrance to 
the city they came down and attacked them. But they were no match for 
Khalid and his men, who put them to flight, having killed some thirty of 
them with the loss of only two lives on their own side. ‘Ikrimah and Safwan 
escaped on horseback to the coast; Suhayl went to his house and locked the 
door. 

The fight was almost at an end when the Prophet entered through the 
pass of Adhakhir into Upper Mecca. Looking down towards the market¬ 
place, he was dismayed to see the flash of drawn swords. “Did I not forbid 
fighting?” he said. But when it was explained to him what had happened he 
said that God had ordained it for the best. 

He could see his red leather tent which Abu Rafi‘ had now pitched for 
him not far from the Mosque. He pointed it out to Jabir who was at his 
side; and after a prayer of praise and thanksgiving he made his way down 
to the hollow. “I shall not enter any of the houses,” he said. 

Umm Salamah, Maymunah and Fatimah were waiting for him in the 
tent; and just before his arrival they had been joined by Umm Hani’. The 
law of Islam had made it clear that marriages between Muslim women and 
pagan men were dissolved, and this applied to her marriage with 
Hubayrah, who had foreseen the fall of Mecca and gone to live in Najran. 
But two of her kinsmen by marriage, one of them the brother of Abu Jahl, 
had taken part in the fighting against Khalid and had afterwards fled to her 
house for refuge. Then ‘All had come to greet her, and seeing the two 
Makhzumites he drew his sword and would have killed them despite the 
formal protection she had given them; but she threw a cloak over them, 
and stepping between him and them she said: “By God, thou shalt slay me 
first!”, whereupon he left the house. And now, having locked the door 
upon them, she had come to intercede with the Prophet. She found 
Fatimah no less stern than ‘All. “Dost thou give protection to idolaters?” 
she said. But Fatimah’s reproaches were cut short by the Prophet’s arrival. 
He greeted his cousin with great affection, and when she told him what had 
happened he said: “It shall not be. Whom thou makest safe, him we make 
safe; whom thou protectest, him we protect.” 

He performed the rite of the greater ablution and prayed eight cycles of 


300 Muhammad 

prayer, after which he rested for an hour or more. Then he called for 
Qaswa’, and having put on his coat of mail and his helmet, he girt on his 
sword; but in his hand he carried a staff, and his visor was up. Some of 
those who had ridden with him that morning were already in line outside 
the tent, and they made an escort for him as he went to the Mosque, talking 
to Abu Bakr, who was at his side. 

He rode straight to the south-east corner of the Ka‘bah and reverently 
touched the Black Stone with his staff, uttering as he did so a magnifica¬ 
tion. Those who were near him repeated it, Allahu Akbar , Allahu Akbar , 
and it was taken up by all the Muslims in the Mosque and the whole of 
Mecca resounded with it, until the Prophet motioned them to silence with 
his hand. Then he made the seven rounds of the Holy House with 
Muhammad ibn Maslamah holding his bridle. At the Lesser Pilgrimage 
that honour had been given to a man of Khazraj. It was therefore fitting 
that this time it should go to a man of Aws. 

The Prophet now turned away from the Ka‘bah towards the idols which 
surrounded it in a wide circle, three hundred and sixty in all. Between these 
and the House he now rode, repeating the verse of the Revelation: The 
Truth hath come and the false hath vanished. Verily the false is ever a 
vanisher , l and pointing at the idols, one by one, with his staff; and each 
idol, as he pointed at it, fell forward on its face. Having completed the 
circle he dismounted and prayed at the Station of Abraham, which was at 
that time adjoining the Ka‘bah. Then he went to the Well of Zamzam 
where ‘Abbas gave him to drink; and he confirmed for ever the traditional 
right of the sons of Hashim to water the pilgrims. But when ‘All brought 
him the key of the Ka‘bah, and when ‘Abbas asked him to give their family 
also the right of guarding it, he said: “I give you only that which ye have 
lost, not that which will be a loss for others.” Then he called for the man of 
‘Abd ad-Dar who earlier had come to him in Medina with Khalid and 
‘Amr, ‘Uthman ibn Talhah; and handing him the key he confirmed for ever 
his clan’s traditional right of guardianship. ‘Uthman reverently took the 
key and went to open the door of the Holy House, followed by the Prophet. 
Usamah and Bilal were close behind, and bidding them enter after him the 
Prophet told ‘Uthman to lock the door behind them. 

Apart from the icon of the Virgin Mary and the child Jesus, and a 
painting of an old man, said to be Abraham, the walls inside had been 
covered with pictures of pagan deities. Placing his hand protectively over 
the icon, the Prophet told ‘Uthman to see that all the other paintings, 
except that of Abraham, were effaced . 1 

He stayed awhile inside, and then, taking the key from ‘Uthman, he 
unlocked the door; and standing on the threshold with the key in his hand, 
he said: “Praise be to God, who hath fulfilled His promise'and helped His 
slave and routed the clans, He alone.” The Meccans who had taken refuge 
in the Mosque had since been joined by many of those who had at first 
taken refuge in their homes and they were sitting in groups, here and there, 
not far from the Ka‘bah. The Prophet now addressed them, saying: “What 
say ye, and what think ye?” They answered: “We say well, and we think 

1 XVII, 81. 2 W. 834; A.I, 107. But other accounts say “all” without mention 

of these two exceptions. 



The Conquest of Mecca 301 

well: a noble and generous brother, son of a noble and generous brother. It 
is thine to command.” He then spoke to them in the words of forgiveness 
which, according to the Revelation, Joseph spoke to his brothers when 
they came to him in Egypt: “Verily I say as my brother Joseph said: This 
day there shall be no upbraiding of you nor reproach. God forgiveth you, 
and He is the most Merciful of the merciful .* 

Abu Bakr had left the Mosque in order the visit his father, and he now 
returned leading Abu Quhafah by the hand, followed by his sister 
Quraybah. “Why didst thou not leave the old man in his house,” said the 
Prophet, “for me to go to him there?” “O Messenger of God,” said Abu 
Bakr, “it is more fitting that he should come unto thee than that thou 
shouldst go unto him.” The Prophet gave him his hand and drawing him 
down to sit in front of him, he invited him to make the two testifications of 
Islam, which he readily did. 

Having given orders that Hubal, the largest of the fallen idols, should be 
broken to pieces and that all of them should be burned, the Prophet had it 
proclaimed throughout the city that everyone who had an idol in his house 
must destroy it. He then withdrew to the nearby hill of Safa, where he had 
first preached to his family. Here he received the homage of those of his 
enemies who now wished to enter Islam, both men and women. They came 
to him in hundreds. Amongst the women was Hind, the wife of Abu 
Sufyan. She came veiled, fearing that the Prophet might order her to be put 
to death before she had embraced Islam; and she said: “O Messenger of 
God, praise be to Him who hath made triumph the religion which I choose 
for myself.” Then she unveiled her face and said: “Hind, the daughter of 
‘Utbah”; and the Prophet said: “Welcome.” Another of the women who 
came to Safa was Umm Hakim, the wife of ‘Ikrimah. When she had 
entered Islam she begged the Prophet to give her husband immunity. He 
did so, although ‘Ikrimah was still at war with him; and Umm Hakim 
found out where he was, and went after him to bring him back. 

The Prophet looked round at the gathering in front of him, and turning 
to his uncle he said: “O ‘Abbas, where are thy brother’s two sons, ‘Utbah 
and Mu‘attib? I see them not.” These were the two surviving sons of Abu 
Lahab. It was ‘Utbah who had repudiated Ruqayyah under pressure from 
his father, and it seemed that they were afraid to appear. “Bring them to 
me,” said the Prophet, so ‘Abbas fetched his nephews, who entered Islam 
and pledged their allegiance. Then the Prophet took them each by the 
hand, and walking between them, he led them to the great place of 
supplication which is named al-Multazam and which is that part of the 
Ka‘bah wall which lies between the Black Stone and the door. There he 
made a long prayer, and noticing the joy on his face, ‘Abbas remarked on 
it. He was answered: “I asked my Lord to give me these two sons of mine 
uncle, and He hath given me them.” 2 

The nearest to Mecca of the three most eminent shrines of paganism was 
the temple of al-‘Uzza at Nakhlah. The Prophet now sent Khalid to destroy 
this centre of idolatry. At the news of his approach the warden of the 
temple hung his sword on the statue of the goddess and called upon her to 


XII, 92. 


2 I.S. IV/t, 41—2. 



302 Muhammad 


defend herself and slay Khalid or to become a monotheist. Khalid de¬ 
molished the temple and its idol, and returned to Mecca. “Didst thou see 
nothing?” said the Prophet. “Nothing,” said Khalid. “Then thou hast not 
destroyed her,” said the Prophet. “Return and destroy her.” So Khalid 
went again to Nakhlah, and out of the ruins of the temple there came a 
black woman, entirely naked, with long and wildly flowing hair. “My 
spine was seized with shivering,” said Khalid afterwards. But he shouted 
“ ‘Uzza, denial is for thee, not worship,” and drawing his sword he cut her 
down. On his return he said to the Prophet: “Praise be to God who hath 
saved us from perishing! I was wont to see my father set out for al-‘Uzza 
with an offering of a hundred camels and sheep. He would sacrifice them to 
her and stay three days at her shrine, and return unto us rejoicing at what 
he had accomplished!” 1 

Meantime most of the Meccans had pledged their allegiance. Suhayl was 
an exception; but having taken refuge in his house, he sent for his son ‘Abd 
Allah to ask him to intervene with the Prophet on his behalf. For despite 
the general amnesty he could scarcely believe that it would apply to him. 
But when ‘Abd Allah spoke to the Prophet he immediately answered: “He 
is safe, under the protection of God, so let him appear.” Then he told those 
about him: “No harsh looks for Suhayl, if ye meet him! Let him come out 
freely, for by my life he is a man of intelligence and honour, not one to be 
blind to the truth of Islam.” So Suhayl came and went as he pleased; but he 
did not yet enter Islam. 

As to Safwan, his cousin ‘Umayr obtained for him a two months’ respite 
from the Prophet, whereupon he set out after him and found him waiting 
for a boat at Shu‘aybah, which was in those days the port of Mecca. 
Safwan was suspicious and flatly refused to change his plans, whereupon 
‘Umayr went again to the Prophet, who gave him his turban of striped 
Yemeni cloth to take to his cousin as a token of his safety. This convinced 
Safwan, who decided to return and seek further assurances for himself. “O 
Muhammad,” he said, “Umayr telleth me that if l agree to a certain thing” 
- he meant the entry into Islam - “well and good, but that if not, thou hast 
given me two months’ respite.” “Stay here,” said the Prophet. “Not until 
thou givest me a clear answer,” said Safwan. “Thou shalt have four 
months 1 respite,” said the Prophet; and Safwan agreed to stay in Mecca. 

‘Ikrimah was the last of the three to come into the presence of the 
Prophet after the victory of Mecca. Yet he was the first of them to enter 
Islam. He had decided to take a boat from the coast of Tihamah to 
Abyssinia, and as he was about to step on board the captain said to him: 
“Make good thy religion with God.” “What shall I say?” said ‘Ikrimah. 
“Say: there is no god but God” was the answer, and the man made it clear 
that for fear of shipwreck he would accept no passenger who did not so 
testify. The four words la ilaha ilia Lldh entered into the soul of ‘Ikrimah, 
and he knew at that moment that he could have uttered them with 
sincerity. Yet he did not embark, for his sole reason for wishing to do so 
had been to escape from those words, that is from the message of 
Muhammad which was summed up in la ilaha ilia Lldh. If he could accept 


W. 873-4- 


The Conquest of Mecca 303 

that message on board boat, he could accept it on shore. “Our God at sea is 
our God on land,” he said to himself. Then his wife joined him and told 
him that the Prophet had guaranteed his safety in Mecca, and they 
returned forthwith. The Prophet knew he was coming and said to his 
Companions: ‘“Ikrimah the son of Abu Jahl is on his way to you, as a 
believer. Therefore revile not his father, for the reviling of the dead giveth 
offence unto the living and reacheth not unto the dead.” 

On his arrival in Mecca ‘Ikrimah went straight to the Prophet, who 
greeted him with a face full of gladness, saying to him, after he had 
formally entered Islam: “Thou shalt not ask of me any thing this day but I 
will give it thee.” “I ask thee,” said ‘Ikrimah, “that thou shouldst pray God 
to forgive me for all mine enmity against thee,” and the Prophet prayed as 
he had asked. Then ‘Ikrimah spoke of the money he had spent and the 
battles he had fought to bar men from following the truth, and he said that 
he would henceforth spend the double of it and fight with doubled effort in 
the way of God; and he kept his promise. 



LXXVI 

The Battle of 
Hunayn and the 
Siege of Tadf 

T HE Prophet’s final definite move against Quraysh had not stopped 
Hawazin from continuing to consolidate their forces. Nor were 
their apprehensions allayed by the news of his easy conquest of 
Mecca and his destruction of all its idols; and great was their alarm at the 
fate of the temple of al-‘Uzza, which had been the sister-shrine to their own 
temple of al-Lat. By the time that the invaders had spent two weeks in 
Mecca, Hawazin had assembled an army of some twenty thousand men in 
the valley of Awtas, to the north of Ta’if. 

Leaving a man of ‘Abdu Shams in charge of Mecca, and appointing 
Mu‘adh ibn Jabal, a young but well informed man of Khazraj, to instruct 
converts in all matters that concerned the religion, the Prophet marched 
out with his whole army, now increased by an additional force of two 
thousand Quraysh. Most of these had recently pledged allegiance to him, 
but some, including Suhayl and Safwan, had not yet entered Islam and 
were simply there to defend their city against Hawazin. Before setting out, 
the Prophet had sent to Safwan to borrow a hundred coats of mail which 
he was known to possess, and the weapons that went with them. “O 
Muhammad,” said Safwan, “is it a question of ‘Give or I will take?’ ” “It is 
a loan to be returned,” said the Prophet, whereupon Safwan agreed to 
provide the camels for the transport of the armour and arms which he 
handed over to the Prophet when they had reached their final camp. 

The clans of Hawazin which had come out against them were Thaqif, 
Nasr, Jusham, and Sa‘d ibn Bakr. Their commander-in-chief was a 
thirty-year-old man of Nasr named Malik, who had already won for 
himself, despite his youth, a reputation for great valour and princely 
munificence. Against the advice of older men he had ordered them to bring 
with them all their women and children and cattle, on the grounds that 
with these in the rear of the army the men would fight more valiantly. He 
sent out three scouts to bring him information about the army now 
approaching from Mecca, but it was not long before they returned almost 
speechless, in a strangely shattered condition, their joints having been 
loosed by terror, some even to the point of dislocation. “We saw white men 



The Battle of Hunayn and the Siege of Td’if 305 

on piebald horses,” said one, “and at once we were smitten with what thou 
seest.” “We are not fighting people of earth,” said another, “but people of 
Heaven. Take our advice and withdraw; for if our men see what we have 
seen they will suffer what we have suffered.” “Shame upon you!” said 
Malik. “Ye are the cowards of the camp.” And so wretched was their 
plight of body and soul he gave orders for them to be put in detention away 
from the rest of the troops lest they should spread panic throughout the 
army. Then he said to those about him: “Show me a man of courage.” But 
the man chosen came back in the same state as the others, having seen the 
same terrifying horsemen in the van of the opposing host. “The very sight 
of them is unbearable,” he gasped. But Malik refused to listen, and after 
dark he gave orders to advance to the valley of Hunayn, through which he 
knew the enemy were bound to pass. He called a halt at his end of Hunayn, 
where the road began to slope down into the valley bed. On either side 
were ravines, some of them capacious with wide entrances which could be 
seen from above but which were completely masked from below. In one or 
two of these he posted a large part of his horse, with orders to charge down 
upon the enemy when he gave the signal. The rest of the army was drawn 
up on the road itself near the top of the gorge. 

The Prophet encamped that night not far from the other end of the 
valley; and, having prayed the dawn prayer with his men, he exhorted 
them, and gave them good tidings of victory if they were steadfast. The sky 
was overcast, so that it was still almost dark as they descended into the 
valley bed. Khalid was in the van as before, commanding Sulaym and 
others. Next came the Muslim part of the new Meccan contingent. The 
Prophet, mounted on Duldul, was this time in the midst of the army, with 
the same squadron of Emigrants and Helpers, but surrounded by more 
members of his own family than ever before, including his cousins Abu 
Sufyan and ‘Abd Allah, who had joined him on his way to Mecca, and the 
two eldest sons of ‘Abbas, FadI and Qitham, and the two sons of Abu 
Lahab. In the rear of the army were those of the Meccans who had not yet 
entered Islam. 

The van had almost finished its descent when in the half-light the 
stationary host of Hawazin loomed into view above them on the opposite 
slope. It was a formidable spectacle, the more so because in the rear of the 
army itself there were thousands of camels, unmounted or mounted by 
woman, and in the dimness of dawn they appeared to be part of the army 
itself. The road was clearly barred in that direction; but before any new 
instructions could be sought or any new orders given, Malik gave his 
signal. The squadrons of Hawazin suddenly wheeled out of the ravines and 
swept down upon Khalid and his men. The onslaught was so fierce and so 
sudden that he could do nothing to rally the Bani Sulaym, who made little 
or no resistance, but turned and fled headlong, scattering the ranks of the 
Meccans who were behind them and who now followed them in flight up 
the slope that they had just descended. The terrible stampede of horses and 
camels choked the defile in its narrowest parts, but the Prophet was at a 
point where he could withdraw a little to his right, and he now made a firm 
stand at the side of the road with a small body of those who had been riding 
near him — Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and others of the Emigrants, some of the 



30 6 Muhammad. 

Helpers, and all the men of his family who were present. Harith’s son Abu 
Sufyan stood beside him and took hold of the ring of DulduPs bridle. 

The Prophet called for others to join him, but his words were drowned 
by the din of battle. So he turned to ‘Abbas, who had a voice of exceptional 
power, and told him to shout: “O Companions of the Tree! O Compan¬ 
ions of the Acacia!” Immediately the summons was answered from all 
sides - Labbayk !, “Here at thy service” - as Helpers and Emigrants rallied 
to him. He soon had with him a hundred men, and spreading out across the 
defile they momentarily checked the onslaught of the enemy. ‘Abbas 
continued to shout and many of those who had fled now returned to the 
fight. The Prophet stood up in his stirrups, the better to be seen and the 
better to see. The enemy were preparing a fresh onslaught, and he prayed: 
“O God, I ask of Thee Thy promise!” Then he told his foster-brother to give 
him some pebbles, and taking them in his hand he flung them in the face of 
the enemy as he had done at Badr. The tide of the battle suddenly turned 
for no apparent reason - or rather, it was not apparent to the believers, but 
it was apparent to the enemy, as it had been previously to their scouts-, and 
afterwards there came the Revelation: God hath helped you on many 
fields, and on the day of Hunayn, when ye exulted in your numbers and 
they availed you naught, and the earth for all its breadth was straitened for 
you, and ye turned back in flight. Then God sent down His Spirit of Peace 
upon His Messenger and upon the faithful, and sent down hosts that ye 
saw not, and punished those who disbelieved. Such is the wage of the 
disbelievers; and afterwards God relenteth unto whom He will, for God is 
Forgiving, Merciful . 1 

The rout was tremendous: Malik fought with great bravery, but finally 
retreated with the men of Thaqif to their walled city of Ta’if. The main part 
of Hawazin was pursued with much slaughter as far as Nakhlah. From 
there they returned to their camp at Awtas; but the Prophet sent a force to 
dislodge them, and they took to the hills. 

The Muslims had lost many men at the outset of the battle, in particular 
the Bani Sulaym who had borne the brunt of the initial ambush. But after 
the first onslaught relatively few had been killed. One of these few was 
Ayman, Usamah’s elder brother, who was struck down at the side of the 
Prophet. 

The Hawazin women and children who had been behind the lines were 
all made captive; and in addition to the camels, sheep and goats there were 
also 4,000 ounces of silver amongst the spoils. The Prophet put Budayl in 
charge, and gave orders that it should all be taken, including the captives, 
to the nearby valley of Ji‘ranah, about ten miles from Mecca. 

Among the divisions of Hawazin was a contingent from the Bani Sa‘d 
ibn Bakr, the clan with whom the Prophet had spent his infancy and early 
childhood; and one of the older captives rebuked her captors saying: “By 
God, l am the sister of your chief.” They did not believe her, but none the 
less brought her to the Prophet. “O Muhammad, I am thy sister,” she said. 
The Prophet gazed at her wonderingly: she was an old woman, of seventy 
or more. “Hast thou any sign of that?” he said, and she at once showed him 


‘ IX. 25-7. 



The Battle ofHunayn and the Siege of Ta’if 307 

the mark of a bite. “Thou didst bite me,” she said, “when I was carrying 
thee in the valley of Sarar. We were there with the shepherds. Thy father 
was my father, and thy mother was my mother.” The Prophet saw that she 
was speaking the truth: it was indeed Shayma’, one of his foster-sisters; 
and spreading out his rug for her, he bade her be seated. His eyes filled with 
tears as he asked href for news of Halimah and Harith, his foster-parents, 
and she told him that they had both died in the fullness of years. After they 
had talked he offered her the possibility of staying with him or returning to 
the Bani Sa‘d. She said she wished to enter Islam, but chose to return to her 
clan. The Prophet gave her a rich present, and intending to give her more he 
told her to remain with those of her people who were in the camp, saying 
that he would see her again on his return. He then set off with the army for 
Ta’if. 

Thaqtf had enough provisions in their city to last them for a year. They 
had also ample means of resisting the engines of war which the Prophet 
ordered to be used against them when all else had failed; and they were 
expert archers. There were many fierce exchanges of arrows, but half a 
month passed and the Muslims were no nearer to capturing the town than 
they had been on the first day. All that had been achieved was the entry of 
some men into Islam, for the Prophet had one day announced by means of 
a crier that any slave of Thaqlf who joined the Muslims would be set free. 
About twenty slaves contrived to make their way out of the city, and 
coming to the camp, they pledged their allegiance. Almost another week 
had passed when the Prophet had a dream that he was given a bowl of 
butter, and a cock came and pecked at it, and spilt it. “I do not think thou 
wilt gain from them this day what thou desirest,” said Abu Bakr, and the 
Prophet agreed. Perhaps he had already come to the conclusion that to 
besiege Thaqlf was not the best way to overcome them. However that may 
be, he now gave orders to raise the siege and to proceed to Ji‘ranah. As they 
moved away from the city, some of the men asked the Prophet to curse its 
inhabitants. Without replying, he raised his hands in supplication and 
said: “O God, guide Thaqlf and bring them to us.” 

Amongst those killed beneath the walls of Ta’if was Umm Salamah’s 
half-brother, the Prophet’s cousin ‘Abd Allah, who had so recently entered 
Islam. 



LXXVII 


Reconciliations 


W HEN the army reached Ji‘ranah the captives were in a large 
enclosure, sheltering from the sun, about six thousand women 
and children. Most of them were very poorly clad, and the 
Prophet sent a man of Khuza‘ah to Mecca to buy a new garment for each 
one, to be paid for out of the silver which was part of the spoils. The camels 
were about twenty-four thousand in number; as for the sheep and goats, 
no one attempted to count them, but they judged them to be forty 
thousand, more or less. 

Many of the men were impatient to receive their share of the spoils, but 
the Prophet was unwilling to commit himself for the moment to any 
irrevocable extent, for he anticipated that Hawazin would send him a 
delegation begging for generous treatment. There was, however, one 
sector of distribution which he did not wish to delay. His fifth of the spoils 
served the same purposes as the money received by way of alms; and a 
recent Revelation had introduced a new category of persons entitled to 
benefit from such funds, namely those whose hearts are to be reconciled . 
The revealed verse said: The alms are for the poor and the needy, and for 
those who collect them, and those whose hearts are to be reconciled, and to 
set free slaves and captives, and for the relief of debtors, and for the cause 
of God, and for the wayfarer-an obligation enjoined by God, And God is 
Knowing, Wise . 1 An immediate example of men whose hearts are to be 
reconciled were those of Quraysh who had recently entered Islam through 
the force of circumstances when their world - the world of Arab paganism 
- had been shattered by the establishment of the new religion in Mecca. 
The Prophet now gave Abu Sufyan a hundred camels, and when he 
thereupon asked that his two sons Yazid and Mu‘awiyah should not be 
forgotten they were each given a hundred, which meant in fact that Abu 
Sufyan received three hundred. This did not escape the notice of others, 
and when KhadijalTs nephew Hakim was given a hundred he asked for 
two hundred more, which the Prophet allotted him forthwith. As in the 
case of Abu Sufyan, any hesitation or reluctance would have defeated the 
purpose of the gift. But to Hakim the Prophet none the less said: “This 
property is a fair green pasture. Whoso taketh it in munificence of soul 
shall be blessed therein; but whoso taketh it for the pride of his soul shall 
not be blessed therein; and he shall be as one that eateth and is not filled. 
The upper hand is better than the lower hand; and begin thy giving with 

1 IX, 60. __ 



Reconciliations 309 


such of thy family as are dependent upon thee.” “By Him who sent thee 
with the truth, I will not receive aught from any man after thee,” said 
Hakim determined that for the future his hand should never be the lower 
hand; and he took only a hundred camels, relinquishing his claim to the 
rest. 1 

Included in the same category of recipients were those who were on the 
brink, and had not yet made their decision to enter Islam. Some of these 
were also given a hundred camels. The most important of them were 
Safwan and Suhayl. Both had fought at Hunayn and when one of the 
unconverted Meccans in the rear had expressed satisfaction at the initial 
flight of the Muslims he was sharply rebuked by Safwan: “If an overlord I 
must have,” he said, “let it be a man of Quraysh rather than Hawazin!” 
After he had received his hundred camels, Safwan accompanied the 
Prophet as he rode through the valley of Ji‘ranah to look at the spoils. 
There were many side valleys opening out from the main valley, and in one 
of these the pasture was especially luxuriant so that it was full of camels 
and sheep and goats, with the men who herded them. Seeing that Safwan 
was struck with wonder at the sight, the Prophet said to him: “Doth it 
please thee, this ravine?” And when Safwan warmly assented, he added: 
“It is thine, with all that is in it.” “I bear witness,” said Safwan, “that no 
soul could have such goodness as this, if it were not the soul of a Prophet. I 
bear witness that there is no god but God, and that thou art His 
Messenger.” 

As to Suhayl, it was also at Ji‘ranah that his final doubts were overcome, 
either through his renewed acquaintance with his son ‘Abd Allah, or his 
witnessing of the miraculous victory of Hunayn, or his experience of the 
Prophet’s presence and his magnanimity, or through all of these together; 
but once he entered Islam he entered it without reserve; and three years 
later, when ‘Abd Allah was killed in battle, and Abu Bakr spoke words of 
comfort to the bereaved father, he replied: “I have been told that God’s 
Messenger said: ‘The martyr shall intercede for seventy of his people.’ And 
I have hopes that my son will not begin with anyone before me.” 

Amongst others who entered Islam at Ji‘ranah were some leading men of 
Makhzum: two brothers of Abu Jahl; Khalid’s half-brother Hisham, the 
full brother of the young Walid who had died; and a second son of the 
Prophet’s aunt ‘Atikah, Zuhayr, whose brother had recently been mar¬ 
tyred at Ta’if. It was Zuhayr who, some ten years previously, in defiance of 
Abu Jahl, had been the first to speak in the Assembly in favour of the 
annulment of the ban on the Bani Hashim and the Bani 1 -Muttalib. His 
mother, ‘Atikah, had already entered Islam before either of her sons. 

The Muslim army had now spent several days in the valley, but still no 
delegation had come from Hawazin, so the Prophet allocated each man his 
portion of the spoils. No sooner had he finished doing so than the 
delegation arrived, and in it was the brother of his foster-father Harith. 
Fourteen of them were already Muslim. The remainder now entered Islam, 
and insisting that the whole tribe of Hawazin must be considered as his 
foster-kinsmen, they asked for his generosity. “We nursed thee on our 

_ ' W.94S. 



310 Muhammad 

laps, and suckled thee at our breasts,” they said. He told them that he had 
waited for them until he thought they were not coming, and that the spoils 
had already been distributed. Then, although knowing the answer, he 
asked them which were the dearer to them, their sons and their wives, or 
their possessions; and when they said “Give us back our sons and our 
wives” he said: “As for those which have fallen unto me and unto the sons 
of ‘Abd al-Muttalib, they are yours; and 1 will plead with other men on 
your behalf. When I have led the congregation in the noon prayer, then 
say: ‘We ask the Messenger of God to intercede for us with the Muslims, 
and we ask the Muslims to intercede for us with the Messenger of God.’ ” l 

They did as they were told, and the Prophet turned to the congregation 
and explained that they were asking for their children and their wives to be 
returned to them. The Emigrants and Helpers immediately presented their 
captives to the Prophet. As for the tribes, some of them did the same, and 
some refused; but those who refused were persuaded to let their captives 
go in return for future compensation; and so they were all returned to their 
people except one young woman who had fallen to the lot of the Prophet’s 
maternal cousin, Sa‘d of Zuhrah, and who wished to remain with him. 

The Prophet gave his foster-sister some more camels and some sheep and 
goats, and bade her farewell. Then, as the delegation were leaving, he 
asked them for news of their leader, Malik. They told him that he had 
joined Thaqif in Ta’if. “Send him word,” he said, “that if he come to me as 
a Muslim, I will return his family to him and his possessions, and I will give 
him a hundred camels.” He had deliberately lodged Malik’s family with 
his aunt ‘Atikah in Mecca, and had withheld his property from being 
distributed. 

When the message reached Malik in Ta’if, he said nothing to Thaqif for 
fear they would imprison him if they suspected his intention; and leaving 
the town by night, he made his way to the camp and entered Islam. The 
Prophet put him in command of the already large and increasing Muslim 
community of Hawazin, with instructions to give Thaqif no peace. The 
raising of the siege of Ta’if had thus been no more than the briefest of 
respites. Another kind of siege, less acute but more implacable, was now to 
take its place. 

The Prophet knew well that though the religion had power in itself to 
work upon souls, this power depended on the religion’s being accepted 
with some degree of commitment, and not just nominally. It was to remove 
barriers to that commitment, such as a sense of bitterness or frustration, 
that the principle of giving to those whose hearts are to be reconciled had 
been revealed; but this principle was not understood at first by many of the 
older Companions, let alone others. In addition to what has already been 
mentioned, rich gifts had also been given to some prominent Bedouin 
whose Islam was highly questionable, whereas more deserving men of the 
desert had been neglected. Sa‘d of Zuhrah asked the Prophet why he had 
given a hundred camels each to ‘Uyaynah of Ghatafan and Aqra‘ of 
Tamlm and nothing to the devout Ju‘ayl of Damrah, who was moreover, 
unlike the other two, exceedingly poor. The Prophet replied: “By Him in 


1-1877 



Reconciliations 311 

whose hand is my soul, Ju‘ayl is worth more than a worldful of men like 
‘Uyaynah and Aqra‘; but their souls have I reconciled that they might 
better submit unto God, whereas I have entrusted Ju‘ayl unto the 
submission 1 he hath already made.” 2 

There were no further objections on the part of the Emigrants; but by the 
end of the Prophet’s halt in Ji‘ranah there was a growing disquietude of 
soul among the four thousand Helpers. Many of them were impoverished, 
and out of the exceptionally plentiful spoils each man had received only 
four camels or their equivalent in sheep and goats. They had hoped for 
good ransoms from the captives, but their share in these they had 
unhesitatingly sacrificed to please the Prophet. Meantime they had witnes¬ 
sed the bestowal of rich gifts upon sixteen influential men of Quraysh and 
four chiefs of other tribes. All these recipients were men of wealth. But not 
one of the Helpers had received a gift from the Prophet. The same was true 
of the Emigrants; but that was no consolation to the citizens of Medina, for 
most of the gifts had gone to men of Quraysh, that is to close kinsmen of 
the Emigrants. “The Messenger of God hath joined his people,” the 
Helpers were saying amongst themselves. “In time of battle it is we who are 
his companions, but when the spoils are divided his companions are his 
own people and family. And we would fain know whence this cometh: if it 
be from God, then we accept it with patience; but if it be no more than a 
thought which hath occurred to God’s Messenger, we would ask him to 
favour us also.” 

When feeling rose high amongst them, Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubadah went to the 
Prophet and told him what was in their minds and on their tongues. “And 
where standest thou in this, O Sa‘d?” said the Prophet. “O Messenger of 
God,” he answered, “I am as one of them. We would fain know whence 
this cometh.” The Prophet told him to gather all the Helpers together in 
one of the enclosures that had been used to shelter the captives; and some 
of the Emigrants also joined them, with Sa‘d’s permission. Then the 
Prophet went to them, and, having given praise and thanks to God, he 
addressed them: “Men of the Helpers, word hath come to me that ye are 
deeply moved against me in your souls. Did I not find you erring, and God 
guided you, poor and God enriched you, enemies each of the other and 
God reconciled your hearts?” “Yea indeed,” they answered. “God and His 
Messenger are most bountiful and most gracious.” “Will ye not retort 
against me?” he said. “How should we retort?” they asked, in some 
perplexity. “If ye wished,” he answered, “ye might say unto me, and say 
truthfully, and be believed: ‘Thou didst come unto us discredited, and we 
credited thee, forlorn and we helped thee, an outcast and we took thee in, 
destitute and we comforted thee.’ O Helpers, are ye stirred in your souls 
about the things of this world whereby I have reconciled men’s hearts that 
they may submit unto God, when you yourselves I have entrusted unto 
your Islam? Are ye not well content, O Helpers, that the people take with 
them their sheep and their camels, and that ye take with you the Messenger 
of God unto your homes? If all men but the Helpers went one way, and the 
Helpers another, I would go the way of the Helpers. God have Mercy upon 


1 isldm. 1 W. 948. 



312 Muhammad 

the Helpers, and on their sons, and on their sons’ sons.” They wept until 
their beards were wet with their tears, and with one voice they said: “We 
are well content with the Messenger of God as our portion and our lot.” 1 


1 1 . 1 . 886 . 



LXXVIII 


After the Victory 


F ROM Ji‘ranah the Prophet made the Lesser Pilgrimage and then 
returned to Medina. Shortly before his arrival he was overtaken 
by ‘Urwah of Thaqlf, the man who had been so impressed at 
Hudaybiyah by the reverence of the Muslims for their leader. 1 ‘Urwah had 
been absent in the Yemen during the recent campaign; and the accounts 
which he had heard on his return of the miraculous victory of Hunayn had 
brought to fullness his already half-formed intention to pledge his alle¬ 
giance to the Prophet. Having done so, he now asked his permission to 
return to Ta’if and summon the people of Thaqlf to Islam. “They will slay 
thee,” said the Prophet. “O Messenger of God,” said ‘Urwah, “I am dearer 
to them than their first-born.” “They will slay thee,” reiterated the 
Prophet. But when ‘Urwah asked his permission a third time he said: 
“Then go if thou wilt.” It was as the Prophet had said: they surrounded his 
house with archers and it was not long before he was mortally wounded by 
an arrow. His family asked him, as he was dying, what he thought of his 
death, and he said: “It is a grace which God in His Bounty hath given me.” 
Then he told them to bury him with the martyrs who had recently been 
killed while besieging Ta’if, and they did so. When the Prophet was told of 
his death, he said: “ ‘Urwah is even as the man of Ya-Sm.- He summoned 
his people unto God and they slew him.” 3 The man was Habib, a carpenter 
of Antioch, who summoned his people to accept the message of Jesus after 
they had driven away the Apostle Peter and others. They killed him; and in 
the words of the Koran: It was said to him: Enter Paradise. He said: O that 
my people knew how God hath forgiven my sins and lavished upon me His 
bounty!* After ‘Urwah’s death his son and his nephew left Ta’if, and came 
to the Prophet in Medina, where they entered Islam, and lived with their 
cousin Mughirah, who was one of the Emigrants. 

The death of ‘Abd Allah ibn Rawahah at Mut’ah had deprived the Prophet 
not only of one of his valued Companions but also of a valued poet, for he 
is said to have considered the verses of ‘Abd Allah as equal to those of 
Hassan and of Ka‘b ibn Malik. But by general consent there were two Arab 
poets at that time who outshone all the others. One of these was Labid; 5 the 
second was another Ka‘b, the son of one of the chief poets of the previous 
generation, Zuhayr ibn Abl Salma. Although he was a man of Muzaynah, 
Ka‘b had spent most of his life with Ghatafan and had therefore not come 

1 See p.250. 2 Surah XXXVI. J W. 9 6t. 

4 XXXVI, 26-7. 5 See p. 93. 



314 Muhammad 

under the Islamic influence which was so powerful in his own tribe. His 
brother Bujayr had entered Islam after Hudaybiyah, but Ka £ b vociferously 
rejected the new religion and wrote satirical verses against the Prophet, 
who let it be known that anyone who killed the offender would be doing a 
service to the cause of God. Bujayr had already - but in vain - urged his 
brother to go to the Prophet and ask his forgiveness. “He slayeth not him 
who cometh unto him in repentance,” he had said; and now, after the 
victory of Mecca, he followed up his previous messages with a poem in 
which were the lines: 

Alone unto God, not to ‘Uzza nor Lat, 

Can be thine escape, if escape thou canst, 

On a day when escape there is none, no fleeing from men, 

Save for him whose heart is pure in submission to God. 

With new multitudinous entries into Islam on all sides, Ka £ b felt as if the 
earth were closing in upon him, and in fear of his life he went to Medina, to 
the house of a man of Juhaynah, a friend of his, to whom he made his 
profession of Islam. The next day he joined the congregation in the 
Mosque for the dawn prayer, after which he went to the Prophet and put 
his hand in his, saying: “O Messenger of God, if Ka‘b the son of Zuhayr 
came unto thee in repentance, a Muslim, asking thee to grant him 
immunity, wouldst thou receive him if 1 brought him unto thee?” And 
when the Prophet answered that he would, Ka £ b said: “ 1 , O Messenger of 
God, am Ka‘b the son of Zuhayr.” One of the Helpers leapt to his feet and 
asked to be allowed to cut off his head, but the Prophet said: “Let him be, 
for he hath come in repentance, and is no longer as he was.” Then Ka‘b 
recited an ode which he had composed for the occasion. It was in the 
traditional Bedouin style, splendid in diction and highly melodious, with 
many vivid descriptions of nature; but the gist of it was to beg forgiveness. 
It ended with a passage in praise of the Prophet and the Emigrants, which 
begins: 

The Messenger a light is, source of light; 

An Indian blade, a drawn sword of God’s swords, 

Amid Quraysh companions. When they chose 
Islam in Mecca’s vale, men said: “Be gone!” 

They went, not weaklings, not as men that flee, 

Swaying upon their mounts and poorly armed, 

But heroes, proud and noble of mien, bright-clad 
In mail of David’s weave 1 for the encounter. 

When he had finished, the Prophet drew off his striped Yemeni cloak and 
threw it over the shoulders of the poet in recognition of his mastery of 
language. 2 But he said afterwards to one of his Companions: “Had he but 
spoken well of the Helpers, for verily they deserve it!” and this was 
reported to Ka‘b, who composed another poem in praise of the Helpers, 
dwelling on their prowess and bravery in battle, the surety of their 
protection, and their generosity as hosts. 3 

1 According to the Koran (XXXIV, 10) David invented chain armour. 

2 I.I.893. 3 I.H. 893. 



After the Victory 315 

It was now clear that they had not long to wait for the birth of Mariyah’s 
child. Salma, who had attended on Khadljah at the birth of all her children, 
was now an elderly woman. It was twenty five years since she had helped to 
bring Fatimah into the world; but she none the less insisted that she would 
do the same for this new child of the Prophet, so when the birth was 
thought to be imminent she moved to the quarter where Mariyah lived in 
Upper Medina. 

The child was born at night, and that same night Gabriel had come to the 
Prophet and addressed him as never before: “O father of Ibrahim.” 
Immediately after the birth Salma sent her husband, Abu Rafi‘, to tell the 
Prophet that he had a son; and the next morning at the Mosque, after the 
dawn prayer, the Prophet told his Companions of the birth. “And I have 
named him,” he added “by the name of my father, Ibrahim.” There was 
great rejoicing in Medina, and strong rivalry among the women of the 
Helpers as to who should be the foster-mother. The choice fell on the wife 
of a blacksmith in Upper Medina who lived near the babe’s mother; and 
the Prophet would visit his son nearly every day, and would often take his 
siesta there. 

Sometimes Ibrahim was brought to his father’s house. ‘A’ishah said that 
one day the Prophet brought him to her in his arms and said: “Behold his 
likeness unto me.” “I see no likeness,” she said. “Dost thou not see how 
fair of skin he is, and how fine of flesh?” said the Prophet. “All that are fed 
on the milk of ewes are plump and fair of skin,” she answered. One of the 
shepherds had instructions to send milk every day to the child’s foster- 
mother. 

The Prophet stayed six months in Medina after his return from Mecca, 
and during that time he sent out several small expeditions. One of these, 
under the leadership of ‘All, was against the tribe of Tayy whose territory 
lay to the north-east of Medina. ‘AH had previously been sent to destroy 
the shrine of Manat at Qudayd on the Red Sea, so that of Arabia’s three 
principal centres of idolatry only the shrine of al-Lat at Ta’if now 
remained. But the temple of Fuls was a centre of idol worship for those of 
the people of Tayy who were not Christian; and the main object of this 
present raid was to destroy that temple. Tayy was the tribe of the poet 
Hatim. 1 His son ‘Adi, a Christian like his father, had succeeded him on his 
death as chief of the tribe. 

At the sudden approach of ‘All and his men, ‘Adi escaped with his 
immediate family except for one of his sisters, who was taken captive with 
many others of the tribe. When she was brought before the Prophet in 
Medina she threw herself at his feet and begged him to set her free. “My 
father would ever free the captive,” she said, “lodge well the guest, feed full 
the hungry and comfort the distressed. Nor turned he ever away the seeker 
of a boon. I am the .daughter of Hatim.” The Prophet answered her with 
kind words, and turning to those about him he said: “Let her go, for her 
father loved noble ways, and God likewise loveth them.” 

Meantime a man of her tribe had come to ask for her release, and the 
Prophet put her in his charge, giving her a camel and fine raiment. She went 


1 Seep. 37. 



3i 6 Muhammad 

in search of her brother ‘Adi and persuaded him to go to Medina. There he 
entered Islam, pledging his allegiance to the Prophet, who confirmed his 
chieftaincy of Tayy; and he proved thereafter to be a faithful and influen¬ 
tial ally. 

It was during these same months, at the beginning of Rajab, that word of 
the death of the Negus came to the Prophet. After the next ritual prayer to 
be prayed in the Mosque, he turned to the congregation and said: “This 
day a righteous man hath died. Therefore arise and pray for your brother 
Ashamah.” 1 Then he led them in the funeral prayer. Reports came later 
from Abyssinia that a light was constantly seen shining over the king’s 
grave. 2 


' B. LX 11 I, 37, 


1 I.I. Z23. 



LXXIX 


Tabuk 


N OT long after the battle of Hunayn the Emperor Heraclius had 
restored the Holy Rood to Jerusalem, and this marked the final 
fulfilment of the victory of the Byzantines over the Persians - the 
victory which the Revelation had predicted and of which it had said that 
day the believers will rejoice . 1 There was indeed cause for rejoicing that the 
Persians had been forced to evacuate their troops from both Syria and 
Egypt. But as regards Syria, one danger seemed to have been replaced by 
another. It was from that direction alone that the new Islamic state 
appeared to be threatened. There were growing rumours in Medina that 
Heraclius had advanced a year’s pay to his army in view of a lengthy 
campaign against Yathrib. It was said, moreover, that the Byzantines had 
already marched south as far as Balga’ and had mustered the Arab tribes of 
Lakhm, Judham, Ghassan and ‘Amilah. These reports were partially 
exaggerated and partially the reverse of the truth. Above all, it was not yet 
generally known that during the Persian campaign Heraclius had had a 
dream in which he saw the triumph throughout Syria of the kingdom of “a 
circumcised man”, whom he had identified with the writer of the letter that 
had summoned him to Islam. The dream was of such power and clarity as 
to inhibit his movements towards the south and even, to some extent, his 
defence of Syria itself. He had now withdrawn from Jerusalem to Homs; 
and there, in his certainty that the whole province would eventually be 
overrun, he proposed to his generals that a treaty should be made with the 
Prophet, giving him the province of Syria on condition that beyond its 
northern frontiers there should be no further advance. Their amazement at 
this idea and their extreme aversion to it caused him to abandon it; but he 
never forgot his dream. 

The Prophet likewise was certain that God would open up Syria to his 
armies of Islam; and whether because he thought the time had come or 
whether because he wished to give his troops some training for the 
inevitable northern campaign, he now announced an expedition against 
the Byzantines, and set about mustering by far the largest and best 
equipped army which he had led. Hitherto it had been his practice not to 
divulge his true objective at first, and to keep preparations as secret as 
possible. But this time there was no attempt at secrecy, and orders were 
sent to Mecca and to the allied tribes that they must send at once to Medina 
all their available armed and mounted men for the Syrian campaign. 


XXX, 4 . 



318 Muhammad 

It was the beginning of October in the year ad 630. The season was 
always a hot one, but that year there was a drought and the heat was more 
oppressive than usual. It was also the time when there was much ripe fruit 
to be eaten, so that there were two reasons for not wanting to take part in 
the expedition; and a third reason was the formidable reputation of the 
imperial legions. The hypocrites and many of the less devout amongst the 
Muslims came to the Prophet with various excuses, asking his permission 
to stay behind, and many of the Bedouin did the same. There were also four 
men of good faith, Ka‘b ibn Malik and two others of Khazraj and a man of 
Aws, who did not deliberately decide to remain at home, nor did they 
proffer excuses; but it seemed to them so undesirable to leave Medina at 
that season that they could not bring themselves to make preparations, and 
they put off the task from one day to the next until the day dawned when it 
was too late and the troops had gone. But the majority set about making 
ready with all speed, and the richer men vied with each other in their 
contributions of money. ‘Uthman alone gave enough for the mounting and 
equipment of ten thousand men. Even so, there was not enough for all 
those who wished to go, and a subsequent Revelation 1 has enshrined in 
memory “the seven weepers” — five needy Helpers and two Bedouin of 
Muzaynah and Ghatafan - whom the Prophet turned reluctantly away 
because he was unable to mount them, and tears filled their eyes as they left 
his presence. 

When all the Bedouin contingents had arrived the army was thirty 
thousand strong, with ten thousand horse. A camp was made outside the 
town, and Abu Bakr was put in charge of it until, when all was ready for 
the march, the Prophet himself rode forth and took command. 

He had left ‘Ali to look after his family, but the hypocrites spread the 
rumour that the Prophet found him a burden and was relieved to be rid of 
his presence. Hearing this, ‘All was so distressed that he put on his armour, 
seized his arms and overtook the Prophet at his first halt, intending to beg 
his permission to accompany him. He told him what the people were 
saying, and the Prophet said: “They lie. I bade thee remain for the sake of 
what I had left behind me. So return and represent me in my family and in 
thine. Art thou not content, O ‘All, that thou shouldst be unto me as Aaron 
was unto Moses, save that after me there is no Prophet.” 2 

During the northward march it happened one day at dawn that the 
Prophet was delayed in making his ablution. The men were in lines for the 
prayers and they waited for him until they feared that the sun would rise 
before they had prayed. Then it was agreed that ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf 
should lead them, and they had already prayed one of the two prayer cycles 
when the Prophet appeared. ‘ Abd ar-Rahman was about to draw back, but 
the Prophet motioned him to remain where he was, and he himself joined 
the congregation. When they had uttered the greeting of Peace which ends 
the prayer the Prophet rose and prayed the cycle he had missed. When he 
had finished he said: “Ye have done well, for verily a Prophet dieth not 
until he hath been led in prayer by a pious man of his people.” 3 

Meantime in Medina, about ten days after the army had marched out, 
one of the four believers who had stayed behind, Abu Khaythamah of 

1 IX, 92. 2 U.897. 3 


W. 1012. 



Tabuk 319 


Khazraj, went out into his garden amid the shade of the trees on a day of 
great heat. There were two huts there, and he found that his wives had 
sprinkled each one with water, and in each a meal was prepared for him, 
and water had been cooled in earthenware jars for him to drink. He stood 
at the threshold of one of the huts and said: “The Messenger of God is in 
the glare of the sun, blown on by hot winds, and Abu Khaythamah is in 
cool shade with food made ready for him, and two fair women, abiding at 
rest on his own estate!” Then he turned to his wives and said: “By God, I 
will not enter either of your huts until I have first overtaken the Messenger, 
so make ready provisions for me.” They did so, and saddling his camel, he 
set off with all speed in the wake of the army. 

About half-way between Medina and Jerusalem, the Prophet said one 
night: “Tomorrow, God willing, ye will come unto the spring of Tabuk. Ye 
will not reach it until the sun be hot. And whoso cometh unto it, let him not 
touch its water until I myself be come.” But two of the first men to reach it 
drank from the spring, and when the main part of the army arrived the 
water had become less than a trickle. The Prophet severely rebuked the two 
men, and then told some of the others to scoop up what water they could in 
the hollows of their hands and to empty it into an old skin. When enough 
had been collected he washed his hands and face in it and poured it over the 
rock which covered the mouth of the spring, passing his hands over it and 
praying as God willed him to pray. Then with a sound as of thunder the 
water gushed forth; and it continued to flow undiminished after all the 
men had satisfied their needs. He turned to Mu‘adh' who was beside him 
and said: “It may be, O Mu‘adh, that thou shalt live to see this place as a 
vale of many gardens.” And it was as he had said. 

He had been disappointed and saddened by the default of the four 
believers who had failed to march out with the army, not least as regards 
Abu Khaythamah, who overtook them a few days after they had reached 
Tabuk. When the lone rider was seen approaching, but before he was 
distinguishable, the Prophet said, as it were in prayer: “Be Abu Khaytha¬ 
mah !” Then, when the man rode up and greeted him, he said: “Alas for 
thee, Abu Khaythamah!”; but when told what had happened, he blessed 
him. 

The army stayed for twenty days in Tabuk. It was evident that the 
rumours of danger from the Byzantines had been quite unfounded. Nor 
was it yet time on the other hand, for the promised conquest of Syria. But 
during those days the Prophet made a treaty of peace with a Christian and 
Jewish community who lived at the head of the gulf of ‘Aqabah and along 
its eastern coast. In return for a yearly tribute they were to be guaranteed 
protection by the Islamic state. He then returned to Medina with the main 
part of the army, having sent Khalid with four hundred and twenty horse 
to Dumat al-Jandal, to the north-east of Tabuk. This important stronghold 
was on the road to Iraq from Medina, as well as being on one of the roads 
to Syria. Ukaydir, its Christian ruler, was surprised when out hunting by 
Khalid, who took him prisoner and brought him to Medina, where he 
made an alliance with the Prophet, and entered Islam. 

1 See p. 304. 



LXXX 


After Tabuk 


I IKE the return from Badr, the return from Tabuk was fraught with 
sadness: another daughter of the Prophet, Umm Kulthum, had died 
during his absence; and this time her husband also had been absent. 
The Prophet prayed at her grave; and he said to ‘Uthman that if he had had 
another unwedded daughter he would have given her to him in marriage. 

Those of the hypocrites who had not taken part in the expedition now 
went to the Prophet and made their excuses, which he accepted, while 
reminding them that God knew their most secret thoughts. But he told the 
three believers who had stayed behind to depart from him until God 
should decide their case, and he gave orders that no one should speak to 
them. For fifty days they lived as outcasts; but after the dawn prayer on the 
fiftieth day, the Prophet announced in the Mosque that God had relented 
to them. In the words of the Revelation which had just come: When the 
earth for all its vastness was straitened for them and when their souls were 
straitened, and they had come to think there is no refuge from God except 
in Him, then turned He unto them that they might turn in repentance unto 
Him. Verily God, He is the Ever-Relenting, the Merciful d The congrega¬ 
tion rejoiced, and many of them hastened from the Mosque to inform the 
three men of the good news. The youngest of them, Ka‘b ibn Malik, had 
pitched a solitary tent for himself outside the town, and he told in after 
years how he had heard a horse galloping towards him and a voice that 
shouted “Good tidings, Ka‘b,” whereupon he had thrown himself down in 
prostration to God, for there could be no good tiding except one. Then he 
went to the Mosque. “When I greeted the Prophet,” he said, “his face 
shone with gladness as he said to me: ‘Rejoice in the best day that hath 
come upon thee since thy mother bore thee.’ I said: ‘Is this from thee, 
O Messenger of God, or is it from God?’ ‘Nay, it is from God,’ he 
answered. When the Messenger was glad on account of good tidings, his 
face would ever have the brightness of a moon.” 2 

Since his entry into Islam, Malik, the leader of Hawazin, had not been 
idle. The Bani Thaqlf might still pride themselves on the impregnability of 
Ta‘if; but they were now surrounded on all sides, far and wide, by Muslim 
communities, and any caravan they sent out was liable to be attacked and 
despoiled. They could not even send camels and sheep out to pasture 
without the risk that they would be captured by Malik’s men, who 
moreover let it be known that they would put to death any man of Thaqif 

1 IX, 118. * U.91%. _ 



After Tabuk 32.1 

who fell into their hands unless he abandoned his polytheism. After some 
months they decided that they had no option but to send a delegation to the 
Prophet saying that they would accept Islam, and asking for a document 
which would guarantee the safety of their people and their animals and 
their land. 

The return from Tabuk had been at the beginning of Ramadan, and in 
that same month the delegation arrived from Ta‘if. They were hospitably 
received and a tent was pitched for them not far from the Mosque. It 
followed as a matter of course that if they entered Islam their territory 
would be under the protection of the Islamic state. But the Prophet did not 
agree to some of their secondary requests. They asked him to let them keep 
al-Lat undestroyed for three years, and when he refused they asked for two 
years and then one, until finally they were reduced to asking for a month’s 
respite, which also met with a refusal. They then begged him not to make 
them destroy their idols with their own hands, and to give them a 
dispensation not to say the five daily prayers. He insisted that they should 
pray, saying: “There is no good in a religion that hath no canonical 
prayer.” But he agreed to excuse them from destroying their idols with 
their own hands; and he ordered Mughlrah, ‘Urwah’s nephew, to return 
with the delegation and to destroy al-Lat, taking with him Abu Sufyan 
from Mecca to assist him. 

After their entry into Islam the delegates fasted the remainder of 
Ramadan in Medina, and then returned to Ta‘if. Abu Sufyan joined the 
party in Mecca, but it was Mughirah single-handed who destroyed the 
idol. His clan took certain measures to protect him, fearing that he might 
suffer the same fate as ‘Urwah; but no one sought to avenge the goddess, 
despite the lamentations of a multitude of women who bewailed her loss. 

Two of the men who most deplored the surrender of the city were 
neither citizens nor devotees of its “lady”. When the Prophet had marched 
on Mecca, Abu ‘Amir, the father of Hanzalah, and Wahshl the javelineer 
had both taken refuge in Ta‘if, which seemed an impregnable fortress. But 
where could they now take refuge? Abu ‘Amir fled to Syria, and it was 
there that he died, “a fugitive, lonely and homeless”, thus fulfilling the 
curse he had unwittingly laid upon himself.' Wahshl was still hesitating 
where to go when a man of Thaqif assured him that the Prophet would put 
no man to death who entered Islam. So he went to Medina, and going to 
the Prophet, he made his formal attestation. Even as he did so one of the 
believers who was present recognised the slayer of Hamzah and said: “O 
Messenger of God, this is Wahshl ” “Let him be,” said the Prophet, “for 
one man’s Islam is dearer to me than the slaying of a thousand disbeliev¬ 
ers.” Then his eyes rested on the black face in front of him. “Art thou 
indeed Wahshl?” he said, adding at the man’s assent: “Be seated, and tell 
me how thou slewest Hamzah.” When the javelineer had finished, the 
Prophet said: “Alas, take thou thy face from me, let me not look upon thee 
again.” 2 

As to the cousin of Abu ‘Amir, Ibn Ubayy, in the month after Tabuk he 
fell seriously ill, and after a few weeks it was clear that he was dying. The 


Seep. iz8. 2 I.I. 566. 



32Z Muhammad 

traditional accounts differ as to the state of soul in which he died, but all 
are unanimous that the Prophet led the funeral prayer for him, and prayed 
beside his grave when he had been buried. According to one tradition, 
when the Prophet had already taken his stand for the prayer, ‘Umar went 
to him and protested against the bestowal of such grace upon a hypocrite, 
but the Prophet answered him, saying with a smile: “Stand thou behind 
me, ‘Umar. I have been given the choice, and I have chosen. It hath been 
said unto me: Ask forgiveness for them, or ask it not, though thou ask 
forgiveness for them seventy times, yet will not God forgive them. 1 And did 
I know that God would forgive him if I prayed more than seventy times, I 
would increase the number of my supplications.” 2 Then he led the prayer 
and walked beside the bier to the cemetery and stood beside his grave. Not 
long afterwards the verse was revealed, with reference to the hypocrites: 
And never pray the funeral prayer over one of them who dieth, nor stand 
beside his grave, for verily they disbelieved in God and His Messenger, and 
died in their iniquity . 3 But according to other traditions 4 this verse had been 
already revealed as part of the Revelation which came immediately after 
the return from Tabuk. Nor was it any longer applicable to Ibn Ubayy, for 
the Prophet visited him in his illness and found that the imminence of death 
had changed him. He asked the Prophet to give him a garment of his own in 
which he could be shrouded, and to accompany his body to the grave, 
which the Prophet agreed to do. Then again he spoke, saying: “O 
Messenger of God, I hope that thou wilt pray beside my bier, and ask 
forgiveness of God for my sins.” Again the Prophet assented, and after his 
death he did as he had promised. The dead man’s son ‘Abd Allah was 
present on all these occasions. 

Thaqif were not the only tribe to send envoys to the Prophet. Many other 
envoys came to Medina from all over Arabia in this “year of deputations”, 
as the ninth year of the Hijrah is called. Amongst others were those which 
came from different parts of the Yemen, including letters from four 
Himyarite princes who announced their acceptance of Islam and their 
repudiation of polytheism and its adherents. The Prophet replied cordial¬ 
ly; he stressed the obligations of Islam, bidding them treat well his 
messengers whom he would send to collect the taxes incumbent upon 
Muslims, Christians and Jews, and specifying that “a Jew or a Christian 
who keepeth his religion shall not be turned away from it but shall pay the 
poll tax .. . and shall have the protection of God and His Messenger”. 5 A 
recent Revelation had said, with regard to religious differences: For each 
We have appointed a law and a path; and if God 6 had wished He could 
have made you one people ... So vie with one another in good works. 
Unto God ye will all be brought back and He will then inform you of those 
things wherein ye differed . 7 

Not all the deputations were conclusive. ‘Amir ibn Tufayl, the man 
responsible for the massacre at Bi’r Ma‘unah, was now chief of the Bani 

1 IX, 8o. 2 1.1.917. 3 IX, 84. 

4 Mirkhond, Rawdat as-Safa\ II, vol. 2, pp. 671-2, citing earlier sources. See also B. 
XXIII, 76. 

5 I.I.956. 6 Seep. 48,note 3. 7 V,48.__ 



After Tabuk 313 

‘Amir, and under pressure from his tribe he came to Medina. But he 
himself was an arrogant man, and in return for his Islam he asked the 
Prophet to name him as his successor. “It is not for thee nor thy people,” 
said the Prophet. “Then give me the tent-dwellers and keep thou the 
villagers,” said ‘Amir. “Not so,” said the Prophet, “but into thy hand will I 
put the reins of the cavalry, for thou art an excellent horseman.” This was 
not enough for the Bedouin chief. “Am I to have naught?” he said 
disdainfully, adding as he turned away: “I will fill all the land with 
horsemen and footmen against thee.” When he had gone, the Prophet 
prayed: “O God, guide the Bani ‘Amir, and rid Islam of ‘Amir the son of 
Tufayl”; and ‘Amir was smitten with an abcess and died before he reached 
home. His tribe sent another deputation, and a pact was at last concluded. 
The poet Labid was one of the envoys, and he now entered Islam. He is 
reported to have had some intention of abjuring poetry thereafter. “In 
exchange, God hath given me the Koran,” he said. But he none the less 
continued to compose poems until his death, placing his gifts at the service 
of his religion. 

The time of the Pilgrimage was approaching, and the Prophet appointed 
Abu Bakr to take charge of it. He set off from Medina with three hundred 
men, but not long after they had gone there came a Revelation which it was 
important that all the pilgrims to Mecca, both Muslims and polytheists, 
should hear. “None shall be a transmitter from me but a man of the people 
of my house,” said the Prophet, and he told ‘All to set out with all speed 
and overtake the pilgrims. He was to recite the revealed verses in the valley 
of Mina and he was also to make it clear that no one after that year would 
be allowed to go round the Holy House naked, and that idolaters were 
making the Pilgrimage for the last time. 

When ‘All overtook the others, Abu Bakr asked him if he had come to 
command the expedition, but he replied that he was under his command, 
so they went on together and Abu Bakr led the prayers and preached the 
sermons. On the day of the Feast, when all the pilgrims were assembled in 
the valley of Mina to sacrifice their animals, ‘All proclaimed the Divine 
Message. The gist of it was that the idolaters were given four months’ 
respite to come and go as they pleased in safety, but after that God and His 
Messenger would be free from any obligation towards them. War was 
declared upon them, and they were to be slain or taken captive wherever 
they were found.' Two exceptions were made: as regards those idolaters 
who had a special treaty with the Prophet and had kept it faithfully, the 
treaty was to be held as valid until its term ran out; and if any individual 
idolater sought protection he was to be granted it and conveyed to a place 
of safety, having first been instructed in Islam. There was also a revealed 
verse which seemed to be addressed especially to the recent converts of 
Mecca who might fear that the exclusion of idolaters would not only 
deprive them of opportunities for trade but also of many rich gifts: O ye 

! The absence of the Names of Mercy stresses the rigorous nature of this message, which 
starkly opens the Surah of Repentance (IX), the only surah in the Koran that does not begin 
with Bismi Llahi r-Rahmani r-Rahim. 


3Z4 Muhammad 

who believe, the idolaters are unclean. Therefore let them not come nigh 
unto the inviolable mosque after this their year. And if ye fear poverty, 
God will enrich you of his Bounty. Verily God is All-Knowing, Infinitely 
Wise.' 

The Prophet remained at home for nearly the whole of the following year, 
which was the tenth since his emigration. Ibrahim could already walk and 
was beginning to talk. Hasan and Husayn had now a small sister named 
after her aunt Zaynab, and Fatimah was expecting a fourth child. Other 
intimates of the household were the three sons of Ja‘far. They were now the 
stepsons of Abu Bakr, who had married their mother Asma’, and she also 
was expecting a child. Particularly dear to the Prophet was her sister Umm 
al-Fadl. In Mecca it had been his custom to visit her often, and since 
‘Abbas’s move to Medina he was once more a frequent visitor at their 
house. Their eldest son, after whom she was named, had now grown to 
manhood and received many signs of favour. On at least one occasion, 
when it was Maymunah’s turn to house the Prophet, she invited her 
nephew Fadl to stay with her. 

Deputations still continued to come as in the previous year, and one of 
these was from the Christians of Najran, who sought to make a pact with 
the Prophet. They were of the Byzantine rite, and in the past had received 
rich subsidies from Constantinople. The delegates, sixty in number, were 
received by the Prophet in the Mosque, and when the time for their prayer 
came he allowed them to pray it there, which they did, facing towards the 
east. 

At the audiences which they had with him during their stay, many points 
of doctrine were touched on, and there were some disagreements between 
him and them concerning the person of Jesus. Then came the Revelation: 
Verily the likeness of Jesus with God is as the likeness of Adam. He created 
him of dust , 1 2 * * 5 then said to him {< Be!”, and he was. This is the truth from thy 
Lord, so be not of the doubters. And whoso contendeth with thee about 
him after the knowledge that hath reached thee, say: Come ye, and let us 
summon our sons and your sons and our women and your women and 
ourselves and yourselves. Then we will imprecate, putting God’s curse on 
those who lie.* The Prophet recited this Revelation to the Christians and 
invited them to meet with him and his family and to settle their dispute in 
the way here suggested. They said they would think about it, and the next 
day when they came to the Prophet they saw that ‘All was with him, and 
behind them were Fatimah and her two sons. The Prophet was wearing a 
large cloak and he now spread it wide enough to enfold them all in it, 
including himself. For this reason the five of them are reverently known as 
“the People of the Cloak”. As to the Christians, they said they were not 
prepared to carry their disagreement so far as imprecation; and the 
Prophet made with them a favourable treaty according to which, in return 

1 IX, 2 . 8 . 

2 The words “in his mother’s womb” are to be understood, for there is no question of 

Jesus having been created fully grown as Adam was. The parallel between the two creations 

lies in the direct Divine intervention for both. 

5 K. Ill, 59-61. 



After Tabuk 3Z5 

for the payment of taxes, they were to have the full protection of the 
Islamic state for themselves and their churches and other possessions. 

The untroubled happiness of the early months of this year came to an 
end with the illness of Ibrahim. It was soon clear that he would not survive. 
He was tended by his mother and her sister Sirin. The Prophet visited him 
continually, and was with him when he was dying. As the child breathed 
his last, he took him in his arms, and tears flowed from his eyes. His 
forbidding of vociferous lamentation had made prevalent the notion that 
all expressions of woe at bereavement were to be discouraged, and the 
mistaken idea still lingered on in many minds. “O Messenger of God,” said 
‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, who was present, “this is what thou hast 
forbidden. When the Muslims see thee weeping, they too will weep.” The 
Prophet continued to weep, and when he could find his voice he said: “Not 
this do I forbid. These are the promptings of tenderness and mercy, and he 
that is not merciful, unto him shall no mercy be shown. O Ibrahim, if it 
were not that the promise of reunion is sure, and that this is a path which 
all must tread, and that the last of us shall overtake the first, verily we 
should grieve for thee with a yet greater sorrow. Yet are we stricken indeed 
with sorrow for thee, O Ibrahim. The eye weepeth, and the heart grieveth, 
nor say we aught that would offend the Lord.” 1 

He spoke words of comfort now to Mariyah and Sirin, assuring them 
that Ibrahim was in Paradise. Then, having left them for a brief while, he 
returned with ‘Abbas and Fadl. The young man washed the body and laid 
it out, while the two older men sat and watched him. Then it was borne 
forth to the cemetery on its little bier. The Prophet led the funeral prayer 
and prayed again for his son at the edge of the grave after Usamah and Fadl 
had laid in it the body. When the earth had been heaped over it, he still 
lingered at the graveside, and calling for a skin of water he bade them 
sprinkle it over the grave. Some unevenness had been left in the earth, and 
noticing this he said: “When one of you doeth aught, let him do it to 
perfection.” And smoothing it over with his hand, he said of his own 
particular action: “No harm it doth nor good, but it giveth relief unto the 
soul of the afflicted.” 2 

He had already stressed more than once the need to make perfection 
one’s aim in every earthly act, and many of his sayings indicate that this 
aim must be unworldly and detached. ‘All is said to have summed up the 
Prophet’s guidance in this respect as follows: “Do for this world as if to live 
for ever and for the next as if to die upon the morrow.” To be always ready 
to depart is to be detached. “Be in this world as a stranger or as a 
passer-by,” 3 the Prophet said. 

On the day of Ibrahim’s death, not long after his burial, there was an 
eclipse of the sun; but when some of the people attributed it to the 
Prophet’s bereavement he said: “The sun and the moon are two signs of the 
signs of God. Their light is not dimmed for any man’s death. If ye see them 
eclipsed, ye should pray until they be clear.” 4 


1 I.S. 1/1,88-9. 


2 ibid. 


3 B. LXXXI, 3. 


4 I.S, ibid. 



LXXXI 

The Degrees 

S PIRITUAL motives were poorly represented in many of the conver¬ 
sions which now took place; and it was not long before there came the 
following further Revelation: The Arabs of the desert say: We have 
faith. Say thou: Faith ye have not, but say “we submit”, for faith hath not 
yet entered your hearts. And if ye obey God and His Messenger, He will in 
no wise withold from you your meed for what ye do .* 

This verse completed the hierarchy of Islam, submission without faith 
being the lowest degree. The higher degrees, that is the degrees of faith, are 
the theme - or rather one of the themes - of the Verse of Light which had 
been revealed to the Prophet some months before the truce of Hudaybiyah. 
Throughout the Koran light means faith, and four degrees of enlighten¬ 
ment are here mentioned: 

God is the Light of the heavens and of the earth. His light is as a niche 
wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass; the glass is as it were a shining 
planet. It is kindled from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the east nor of 
the west. The oil thereof wellnigh blazeth in splendour even though the 
fire have not touched it. Light upon light. God guideth to His light 
whom he will; and God citeth symbols for men; and God is of all things 
the Knower . 1 

There is firstly, in ascending order, the niche, that is illuminated but not 
in itself luminous. Then there is the crystalline, glass, above which is the 
splendour of the oil; and finally there is the flame itself. The mention of 
symbols recalls another verse which begins with the same sentence: God 
citeth symbols for men , but which adds the reason: that they may 
meditate; 3 and the whole of the Light Verse is clearly a summons to 
meditation. But as regards the different degrees, the Koran is here only 
implicit. Elsewhere, starting from some of the earliest Revelations, it is 
more explicit. In one of these 4 mankind is divided into three groups, those 
of the right , those of the left and the foremost. Those of the right are the 
saved, those of the left the damned. As to the foremost , that is, those of the 
highest degree, who are also called the slaves ofGodf it is said of them that 


1 XLIX, 14. 2 XXIV, 35. 3 UX,2i. 4 LVI, 7-40. 

5 LXVI, 6; LXXXIX, 29. The Koran uses the term slaves of God in two senses, one 
altogether inclusive - even Satan is His slave - and the other exceedingly exclusive, as in the 
above verses, and also in the following, which is addressed to Satan: As to My slaves, over 
them thou hast no power. (XVII, 65.) 



The Degrees 3 27 


they are brought near to God , this epithet being also used of the 
Archangels to distinguish them from the Angels. Other early Revelations 
introduced a third degree into the hierarchy of the faithful, the righteous , 
who are between the foremost and those of the right. The relationship 
between these three degrees may be inferred from what the Koran says 
about their blessings in Paradise. Whereas those of the right are given pure 
flowing water to drink, it is the foremost alone who have direct access to 
the highest fountains, but the righteous are given a draught which has been 
blended at one or another of these fountains, 1 which suggests that they are 
those who follow in the footsteps of the foremost. 

Degrees of superiority are also implied by the Revelation in its mention 
of the heart. In speaking of the majority, it says: Not blind are the eyes, but 
blind are the hearts within the breastsr The Prophet on the other hand, like 
Prophets before him, said that his heart was awake, which means that its 
eye was open; and the Koran indicates that this possibility can be shared, if 
only in some measure, by others also, for it sometimes addresses itself 
directly to those who have hearts . 3 It is reported that of Abu Bakr the 
Prophet said: “He surpasseth you not through much fasting and prayer but 
he surpasseth you in virtue of something that is fixed in his heart.” 4 

The Prophet often spoke of the superiority of some of his followers over 
others; and in Mecca, at the time of the victory, when in his presence 
Khalid retorted angrily against ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, who had 
rebuked him, he said: “Gently Khalid, let be my Companions; for if thou 
hadst Mount Uhud all in gold and didst spend it in the way of God thou 
wouldst not attain unto the merit of any man of my Companions.” 5 

According to the Revelation the differences between one degree and 
another are vaster in the next world than in this: Behold how We have 
favoured some of them above others; and verily the Hereafter is greater in 
degrees and greater in hierarchic precedences. b And the Prophet said: “The 
people of Paradise will behold the high place that is above them even as 
they now behold the bright planet 7 on the eastern or western horizon.” 8 
The disparities between man and man were also reflected in the manner of 
his teaching, some of which was reserved for the few who would under¬ 
stand it. Abu Hurayrah said: “I have treasured in my memory two stores of 
knowledge which I had from the Messenger of God. One of them have I 
divulged; but if I divulged the other ye would cut this throat,”* and he 
pointed to his own throat. 

During the return march to Medina after the victories of Mecca and 
Hunayn the Prophet said to some of his Companions: “We have returned 
from the Lesser Holy War to the Greater Holy War.” And when one of 
them asked: “What is the Greater Holy War, O Messenger of God?” 
he answered: “The war against the soul.” 10 The soul of fallen man 
is divided against itself. Of its lowest aspect the Koran says: Verily the soul 
commandeth unto evil .' 1 The better part of it, that is the conscience, 
is named the ever-upbraiding soul ; 12 and it is this which wages the 

' LXXVI,5;LXXXIII,2 7 . 2 XXII, 46. See also p. 89. 

3 XII, in; XIII, 19, etc. 4 al-Hakim at-Tirmidhl, Nawadir al-usul. 

5 I.I.853. 6 XVII, 21. 7 Venus. 8 M. LI, 4. 

9 B. Ill, 42. 10 BayhaqI, Zuhd. 11 XII, 53. 12 LXXV, 2. 



32B Muhammad 

Greater Holy War, with the help of the Spirit, against the lower soul. 

Finally there is the soul which is at peace , that is the whole soul no longer 
divided against itself, after the battle has been won. Such are the souls of 
those who have reached the highest degree, at the level of the foremost, the 
slaves of God , the near. The Koran addresses this perfect soul in the words: 
O thou soul which art at peace, return unto thy Lord with gladness that is 
thine in Him and His in thee . 1 Enter thou among My slaves. Enter thou My 
Paradise . 1 The twofold nature of this blessing recalls the Koran’s promise 
of two Paradises for the blessed soul, and also the Prophet’s reference to his 
own ultimate state as “The meeting with my Lord and Paradise”. For the 
soul which is at peace , the entry into My paradise corresponds to “the 
meeting with my Lord”, whereas the entry among My slaves corresponds 
to “Paradise”, that is the second accompanying Paradise. The Supreme 
Paradise, that of God, “the meeting with my Lord”, is none other than 
Ridwan. The following verse had recently been revealed: God hath 
promised the believers, the men and the women, gardens that are watered 
by flowing rivers wherein they shall dwell immortal, abodes of excellence 
in the Paradises of Eden. And Ridwan from God is greater. That is the 
Infinite Beatitude? 

The Prophet also spoke of the supreme degree insofar as it can be 
reached during life on earth, and this saying is one of those which are called 
holy traditions because they transmit the direct words of God: “My slave 
ceaseth not to draw near unto Me with devotions of his free will until I love 
him; and when I love him I am the hearing with which he heareth and the 
sight with which he seeth and the hand with which he graspeth and the foot 
on which he walketh.” 4 

The chief of the voluntary devotions is dhikr Allah , which may be 
rendered “remembrance of God or calling upon God”. In one of the first 
Revelations the Prophet was commanded: Invoke in remembrance the 
Name of thy Lord, and devote thyself to Him with an utter devotion? A 
later Revelation says: Verily the ritual prayer preserveth from iniquity and 
abomination; but the remembrance of God is greater? With reference to 
the heart’s blindness and its cure the Prophet said: “For everything there is 
a polish that taketh away rust, and the polish of the heart is remembrance 
of God.” 7 And when asked who would rank highest in God’s esteem on the 
Day of Resurrection he answered: “The men and the women who invoke 
God much in remembrance.” And when asked if they would rank even 
above the man who had fought in God’s path he answered: “Even though 
he wielded his sword amongst infidels and idolaters until it was broken and 
smeared with blood, yet would the rememberer of God have a more 
excellent degree than his.” 8 


1 That is, with mutual Ridwan (see p. 95). 

2 LXXXIX, 2.7-30. 3 IX, 72. 

4 B., LXXXI, 37. 5 LXXIII, 8. 6 XXIX, 45. 

7 BayhaqI, Da ‘awdt. 8 Tir. XLV. 



LXXXII 


The Future 


T HE Prophet said: “The best of my people are my generation; then 
they that come after them; then they that come after them”; 1 and he 
rejoiced in the outstanding members of his generation, that is in 
those whom he considered as his Companions. To ten of them who visited 
him on one occasion he promised Paradise. These were Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, 
‘Uthman, ‘All, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Abu ‘Ubaydah, Talhah, 
Zubayr, Sa‘d of Zuhrah, and Sa‘Td the son of Zayd the Hanif. He had 
already given the same assurance to some of them before, and the books of 
his sayings have recorded much of his great praises of the Promised Ten, 
and of others to whom he also gave good tidings of Paradise, as when he 
affirmed: “For three doth Paradise long, for ‘All, ‘Ammar 2 and Salman.” 5 
To Fatimah he said: “Thou art the highest of the women of the people of 
Paradise, excepting only the Virgin Mary, daughter of ‘Imran.” 4 In 
prediction of the great part to be played by ‘All as one of the chief 
transmitters of his wisdom to future generations, he said: “I am the city of 
knowledge, and ‘All is its gate”; 5 and he said in general: “My Companions 
are even as the stars: whichsoever of them ye follow, ye shall be rightly 
guided.” 6 

When the men returned from Tabuk they had said amongst themselves 
that their days of fighting were now at an end; and this idea was so 
strengthened by the coming of the various delegations, which continued 
throughout the tenth year, that many of the believers set about selling their 
arms and their armour. But when the Prophet heard of this he forbade 
them to do so, saying: “A body of my people will not cease to fight for the 
truth until the coming forth of the Antichrist.” He also said: “If ye knew 
that which I know, ye would laugh little and weep much” 7 and “No time 
cometh upon you but is followed by a worse.” 8 He warned them that his 
people would surely follow the Jews and the Christians upon the path of 
degeneration: “Ye will follow them that were before you span by span and 
cubit by cubit until if they went down the hole of a poisonous reptile ye 
would follow them down.” 9 And, in speaking of the lowest ebb which 
would be reached by mankind in general before the end, he said: “Islam 
began as a stranger and will become once more as a stranger.” 10 Yet he 

1 B. LXII, i. 1 Seep. 79. 3 Tir. XLVI, 33. 

4 A. H. Ill, 64. The Koran tells how the Angels said to Mary: He (God) hath chosen thee 

above all the women of the worlds (III, 14). 

5 Tir. XLVI, zo. 6 F. XXVI, Manaqib as-Sahabah. 

7 B.LXXXI,2 7 . 8 B.XCII, 14. * M. XLVII, 6 . 10 M.1,232. 



330 Muhammad 

promised that God would not abandon them: ‘‘God will send to this 
community, at the head of every hundred years, one who will renew for it 
its religion.” 1 On another occasion those of his Companions who were 
with him heard him exclaim more than once: “O my brethren!” They said 
to him: “O Messenger of God, are we not thy brethren?” and he answered: 
“Ye are my companions. But my brethren are amongst those who have not 
yet come” - in other versions “who will come in the last days”. The way 
he spoke suggested that he was referring to persons of great spiritual 
eminence. 

He also prophesied that despite the evils of the latter days there will arise 
a caliph whom men will speak of as the Mahdl, which means the rightly 
guided: “The Mahdl will be of my stock and he will be broad of forehead 
and aquiline of nose. He will fill the earth with right and with justice even 
as it hath been filled with wrong and oppression. Seven years will he 
reign.” 2 

But finally, towards the end of his reign or after it, the Antichrist would 
come, “a man blind in his right eye in which all light is extinguished, even 
as it were a grape”, 3 and he would cause great corruption on earth, and by 
his power to work marvels he would win more and more men to his side. 
But there would be a body of believers who would fight against him. 
“When they are pressing on to fight,” said the Prophet, “even while they 
straighten their lines for the prayer when it is called, Jesus the son of Mary 
will descend and will lead them in the prayer. And the enemy of God, when 
he seeth Jesus, will melt even as salt melteth in water. If he were let be, he 
would melt unto perishing; but God will slay him at the hand of Jesus, who 
will show them his blood upon his lance.” 4 

He also spoke of many of the signs by which men might know that the 
coming to pass of these final things was near; and as one of the signs he 
mentioned the excessive height of the buildings that men would build. But 
that prophecy was made on a great occasion which must be chronicled 
more fully, on the authority of ‘Umar’s son ‘Abd Allah, repeating the 
words of his father. 

‘Umar said: “One day when we were sitting with the Messenger of God 
there came unto us a man whose clothes were of exceeding whiteness and 
whose hair was of exceeding blackness, nor were there any signs of travel 
upon him, although none of us knew him. He sat down knee unto knee 
opposite the Prophet, upon whose thighs he placed the palms of his hands, 
saying: ‘O Muhammad, tell me what is the surrender ( islam)\ The 
Messenger of God answered him saying: ‘The surrender is to testify that 
there is no god but God and that Muhammad is God’s Messenger, to 
perform the prayer, bestow the alms, fast Ramadan and make, if thou 
canst, the pilgrimage to the Holy House.’ He said: ‘Thou hast spoken 
truly,’ and we were amazed that having questioned him he should corrobo¬ 
rate him. Then he said: ‘Tell me what is faith (i tman ).’ He answered: ‘To 
believe in God and His Angels and His Books and His Messengers and the 
Last Day, and to believe that no good or evil cometh but by His Provi¬ 
dence.’ ‘Thou hast spoken truly,’ he said, and then: ‘Tell me what is 


1 A.D.XXXVI, i. 


2 A.D. XXXV, 4. 


3 M. LII, 20. 


4 M. LII, 9. 


The Future 331 

excellence ( ihsan ).’ He answered: ‘To worship God as if thou sawest Him, 
for if thou seest Him not, yet seeth He thee.’ Thou hast spoken truly,’ he 
said, and then: Tell me of the Hour.’ He answered: The questioned 
thereof knoweth no better than the questioner.’ He said: ‘Then tell me of 
its signs.’ He answered: That the slave-girl shall give birth to her mistress; 1 
and that those who were but barefoot naked needy herdsmen shall build 
buildings ever higher and higher.’ Then the stranger went away, and I 
stayed a while after he had gone; and the Prophet said to me: ‘O ‘Umar, 
knowest thou the questioner, who he was?’ I said: ‘God and His Messenger 
know best.’ He said: ‘It was Gabriel. He came unto you to teach you your 
religion.’” 2 


1 A woman giving birth to a daughter will thereby become merely a slave-girl to her by 
reason of latter-day children’s disrespect for their parents. The second part of the saying 
predicts not only a chaos in the social order but also the ultimate triumph of the sedentary 
way of life over the nomadic way, that is, the final seal set upon Cain’s murder of Abel. 

2 M. 1 ,1. 



LXXXIII 


The Farewell 
Pilgrimage 

W HEN the Prophet was in Medina during Ramadan it was his 
wont to make a spiritual retreat in the Mosque during the middle 
ten days of the month, and some of his Companions would do 
the same. But this year, having kept the ten appointed days, he invited his 
Companions to remain in retreat with him for another ten days, that is 
until the end of the month, which they did. It was in Ramadan every year 
that Gabriel would come to him to make sure that nothing of the 
Revelation had slipped from his memory; and this year, after the retreat, 
the Prophet confided to Fatimah, as a secret not yet to be told to others: 
“Gabriel reciteth the Koran unto me and I unto him once every year; but 
this year he hath recited it with me twice. 1 cannot but think that my time 
hath come” 1 

The month of Shawwal passed; and in the eleventh month of the year it 
was proclaimed throughout Medina that the Prophet himself would lead 
the Pilgrimage. The news was sent to the desert tribes, and multitudes 
flocked to the oasis from all directions, glad of the opportunity of 
accompanying the Messenger at every step of the way. The Pilgrimage 
would be unlike any that had taken place for hundreds of years: the 
pilgrims would all be worshippers of the One God, and no idolater would 
desecrate the Holy House with the performance of any heathen rites. Five 
days before the end of the month the Prophet set out from Medina at the 
head of over thirty thousand men and women. All his wives were present, 
each in her howdah, escorted by ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf and ‘Uthman 
ibn ‘Affan. Abu Bakr was accompanied by his wife, Asma’, and at one of 
the first halts she gave birth to a son, whom they named Muhammad. Abu 
Bakr was for sending her back to Medina, but the Prophet told him to tell 
her to perform the greater ablution and then to consecrate herself for the 
Pilgrimage, and to go with them as she had planned. 

At sunset on the tenth day after leaving Medina the Prophet reached the 
pass through which he had entered Mecca on the day of the victory. There 
he spent the night, and the next morning he rode down to the Hollow, 
When he came within sight of the Ka‘bah he raised his hands in reverence. 


B. LXI, 15. 



The Farewell Pilgrimage 333 

letting fall the rein of his camel, which he then took up in his left hand, and 
with his right hand held out in supplication he prayed: “O God, increase 
this House in the honour and magnification and bounty and reverence and 
piety that it receiveth from mankind!” 1 He entered the Mosque and made 
the seven rounds of the Ka‘bah, after which he prayed at the Station of 
Abraham. Then going out to Safa he went seven times between it and 
Marwah, and those who were with him did their best to record in their 
memories the exact words of praise and prayer that he uttered at every 
station. 

Returning to the Mosque, he now entered the Ka‘bah with the keeper of 
its keys, ‘Uthman of ‘Abd ad-Dar, taking with him also Bilal and Usamah 
as before. But that evening when he visited ‘A’ishah in her tent she noticed 
that he was sad and asked him why. “I have done a thing today,” he said, 
“that I would I had not done. I entered the House; and it may be that a man 
of my people” — he meant in years to come - “will not be able to enter it 
and that he will therefore feel some disquiet in his soul. And we were only 
ordered to go round it, not ordered to enter it.” 2 

Again he refused to lodge in any house in Mecca despite the plea of Umm 
Hani’ that he would stay with her; and on the eighth day of the new moon 
he rode to the valley of Mina followed by the rest of the pilgrims. Having 
spent the night there, he rode on after daybreak to ‘Arafah, a broad valley 
about thirteen miles east of Mecca, just outside the sacred precinct. 
‘Arafah is on the road to Ta’if and is bounded north and east by the 
mountains of Ta’if. But separate from these, and surrounded on all sides 
by the valley, is a hill which is also named ‘Arafah or the Mount of Mercy. 
It is the central part of this pilgrimage station, which extends none the less 
over most of the lower ground; and it was on this hill that the Prophet took 
up his station that day. 

Some of the Meccans expressed surprise that he had gone so far, for 
while the other pilgrims went on to ‘Arafah Quraysh had been accustomed 
to remain within the sacred precinct saying: “We are the people of God.” 
But he said that Abraham had ordained the day on ‘Arafah as an essential 
part of the Pilgrimage, and that Quraysh had forsaken his practice in this 
respect. The Prophet stressed that day the antiquity of the Pilgrimage, and 
the words “Abraham’s legacy” were often on his lips. 

To impress on all the tribes that henceforth blood feuds were at an end 
throughout the whole community of Islam and that each man’s life and 
possessions were sacrosanct, he sent as crier throughout the multitude 
Safwan’s brother RabPah, who had a powerful voice, and told him to 
proclaim: “The Messenger of God saith: See ye what month this is?” They 
were silent, and he answered: “The holy month.” Then he asked: “See ye 
what land this is?” Again they were silent and he answered: “The holy 
land.” Then he said: “See ye what day this is?” And again it was he who 
gave the answer: “The day of the Greater Pilgrimage.” Then he proclaimed 
according to the Prophet’s instructions: “Verily God hath made inviolable 
for you each other’s blood and each other’s property, until ye meet your 
Lord, even as He hath made inviolable this your day, in this your land, in 
this your month.” 

W. 1097. 2 w.iioo. 


334 Muhammad 

When the sun had passed its zenith the Prophet preached a sermon 
which he began, after praising God, with the words: “Hear me, O people, 
for 1 know not if ever I shall meet with you in this place after this year.” 
Then he exhorted them to treat one another well and gave them many 
reminders of what was commanded and what was forbidden. Finally he 
said: “I have left amongst you that which, if ye hold fast to it, shall preserve 
you from all error, a clear indication, the Book of God and the word of His 
Prophet. O people, hear my words and understand.” He then imparted to 
them a Revelation which he had just received and which completed the 
Koran, for it was the last passage to be revealed: This day the disbelievers 
despair of prevailing against your religion, so fear them not, but fear Me! 
This day have I perfected for you your religion and fulfilled My favour 
unto you, and it hath been My good pleasure to choose Islam for you as 
your religion . 1 

He ended his brief sermon with an earnest question: “O people, have I 
faithfully delivered unto you my message?” A powerful murmur of assent, 
“O God, yea!”, arose from thousands of throats and the vibrant words 
Allahumma na'm rolled like thunder throughout the valley. The Prophet 
raised his forefinger and said: “O God, bear witness !” 2 

The ritual prayers were then prayed and the rest of the Day of ‘Arafah, as 
it is called, was spent in meditation and supplication. But as soon as the sun 
had set the Prophet mounted his camel, and bidding Usamah mount 
behind him he rode down from the hill and across the valley in the 
direction of Mecca, followed by his fellow pilgrims. It was the tradition to 
ride quickly at this point, but at the first signs of excess he cried out: 
“Gently, gently! In quietness of soul! And let the strong amongst you have 
a care for the weak!” They spent the night at Muzdalifah, which is within 
the sacred precinct, and there they collected small pebbles with which to 
stone Satan, who is represented by three pillars at ‘Aqabah in the valley of 
Mina. Sawdah asked the Prophet’s permission to leave Muzdalifah in the 
small hours. Being large in stature and heavier than most of the women, 
she had suffered more from the heat and from the exertions of travel, and 
she was anxious to perform the rite of stoning before the multitude arrived. 
So he sent her on ahead in the company of Umm Sulaym, escorted by ‘ Abd 
Allah, one of the sons of ‘Abbas. 

The Prophet himself prayed the dawn prayer in Muzdalifah, and then 
led the pilgrims to ‘Aqabah, with Fadl mounted behind him on his camel. It 
was at this very spot on this very day twelve years previously that he had 
met the six men of Khazraj who had pledged their allegiance to him, thus 
preparing the way for the First and Second ‘Aqabah pacts. After the 
stoning, the animals were sacrificed, and the Prophet called for a man to 
shave his head. The pilgrims gathered round him in the hopes of obtaining 
some locks of his hair. Abu Bakr remarked afterwards on the contrast 
between the Khalid of Uhud and the Trench and the Khalid who now said: 
“O Messenger of God, thy forelock! Give it unto none but me, my father 
and my mother by thy ransom !” 3 And when the Prophet gave it him he 
pressed it reverently against his eyes and his lips. 


The Farewell Pilgrimage 335 

The Prophet now bade the pilgrims visit the Ka‘bah and return to spend 
that night and the two next nights in Mina. He himself waited until the late 
afternoon. Then his wives accompanied him to Mecca, all but ‘A’ishah, 
who was not in a state of ritual purity. A few days later, as soon as she was 
able, he sent her outside the sacred precinct, escorted by her brother ‘Abd 
ar-Rahman, There she consecrated herself afresh, and going to Mecca she 
made the rounds of the Ka‘bah. 

Having finished the campaign in the Yemen, the troop of three hundred 
horse that the Prophet had sent out in Ramadan was now approaching 
Mecca from the south. ‘All had ridden on ahead of his men, eager to meet 
the Prophet as soon as possible and to make with him the Pilgrimage, 
which he now had done. Amongst the state’s fifth of the spoils there was 
enough linen to clothe the whole army, but ‘All had decided that it must be 
handed over to the Prophet untouched. In his absence, however, the man 
he had left in charge was persuaded to lend each man a new change of 
clothes out of the linen. The change was much needed for they had been 
away from home for nearly three months. When they were not far from 
entering the city, ‘All rode out to meet them and was amazed to see the 
transformation that had taken place. “I gave them the garments,” said the 
deputy commander, “that their appearance might be more seemly when 
they entered in among the people.” The men all knew that everyone in 
Mecca would now be wearing their finest clothes in honour of the Feast, 
and they were anxious to look their best. But ‘All felt he could not 
countenance such a liberty and he ordered them to put on their old clothes 
again and return the new ones to the spoils. Great resentment was felt 
throughout the army on this account, and when the Prophet heard of it he 
said: “O people, blame not ‘All, for he is too scrupulous in the path of God 
to be blamed.” But these words were not sufficient, or it may be that they 
were only heard by a few, and the resentment continued. 

On the way back to Medina one of the troops bitterly complained of ‘All 
to the Prophet, whose face changed colour. “Am I not nearer to the 
believers than their own selves?” he said; and when the man assented, he 
added: “Whose nearest I am, his nearest ‘All is.” Later on the journey, 
when they had halted at Ghadir al-Khumm, he gathered all the people 
together, and taking ‘All by the hand he repeated these words, to which he 
added the prayer: “O God, be the friend of him who is his friend, and the 
foe of him who is his foe”; and the murmurings against ‘All were silenced. 1 

One of the deputations of the previous year had been from a Christian tribe 
in Yamamah, the Bani Hanlfah, whose territory lay along the eastern 
boundary of Najd. They had agreed to enter Islam; but now one of their 
men, Musaylimah by name, claimed that he too was a Prophet, and not 
long after the return of the pilgrims from Mecca the following letter was 
brought to Medina by two envoys from Yamamah: “From Musaylimah 
the Messenger of God to Muhammad the Messenger of God, peace be on 
thee! It hath been given me to share with thee the authority. Half the earth 
is ours, and half belongeth unto Quraysh, although they are a people who 


Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa n-nihayah, V, 209. 


3 3 6 Muhammad 

transgress.” The Prophet asked the envoys what they thought of the matter 
and they said: “Our opinion is even as his.” “By God,” said the Prophet, 
“if it were not that envoys may not be slain I would cut off your heads.” 
Then he dictated a letter for them to give to their master: “From Mu¬ 
hammad the Messenger of God to Musaylimah the liar. Peace be on him 
who followeth the guidance! Verily the earth is God’s; He causeth whom 
He will of His slaves to inherit it; and the final issue is in favour of the 
pious”. 1 

Two other impostors arose about this time, Tulayhah, a chief of theBani 
Asad, and Aswad ibn Ka‘b of the Yemen. The Yemenite had a brief success 
and rapidly gained control over a wide area, but his pride soon turned 
many of his followers against him; and after a few months he was 
assassinated. Tulayhah was finally defeated by Khalid, and renouncing all 
his claims he became a strength for Islam. As to Musaylimah, it was his 
destiny to be pierced by a javelin from the hand of WahshI, while ‘Abd 
Allah, the son of Nusaybah, struck him a mortal blow with his sword. But 
this defeat took place several months later. For the moment, as the moon of 
the Pilgrimage waned and as the eleventh year of the Hijrah opened, all 
these impostors were potential dangers to Islam; and there was also a 
woman of TamTm named Sajah, who claimed to be a prophetess. But the 
Prophet was not disposed to take immediate action against any of them. 
His attention was turned towards the north, and in the last days of Safar, 
the second month of the year, that is the end of May in ad 632, he decided 
that the time had come to reverse the defeat of Mut’ah. Having ordered 
preparations to be made for a campaign against those Arab tribes of Syria 
which had flanked the imperial legions on the day when Zayd and Ja‘far 
were killed, he called Zayd’s son Usamah to him and put him, despite his 
youth, in command of the three-thousand-strong army. 


1 I.I.965. 



LXXXIV 


The Choice 


T HE Prophet continually spoke of Paradise, and when he did so it 
was as a man who sees what he describes. This impression was 
confirmed by many other signs, as for example when he once 
stretched out his hand as if to take something, and then drew it back. He 
said nothing, but some of those who were with him noticed his action and 
questioned him about it. “I saw Paradise,” he said, “and I reached out for a 
cluster of its grapes. Had I taken it, ye would have eaten of it as long as the 
world endureth.” 1 They had grown accustomed to thinking of him as one 
who is already in a sense in the Hereafter. Perhaps it was partly for this 
reason that when he spoke of his death, and when he inferred indirectly, as 
sometimes now he did, that it might be imminent, his words made little 
impression on them. Moreover, despite his sixty-three years, he still had 
the stature and grace of a much younger man, his eyes were still bright, and 
there were only a few white hairs in his black hair. Yet on one occasion a 
remark of his when he was with his wives was sufficiently ominous to 
prompt the question as to which of them would be the first to rejoin him in 
the next world. He replied: “She of the longest reach will be the soonest of 
you to join me,” 2 whereupon they set about measuring their arms, one 
against another. Presumably, though it is not recorded, Sawdah was the 
winner of this contest, for she was the tallest of them and in general the 
largest. Zaynab, on the other hand, was a small woman, with an arm to 
match. But it was Zaynab who died first of them all, some ten years later. 
Only then did they realise that by “she of the longest reach” the Prophet 
had meant the most giving, for Zaynab was exceedingly generous, like her 
predecessor of the same name who had been called “the mother of the 
poor”. 

One night, not long after the Prophet had ordered preparations for the 
Syrian campaign and before the army had left, he called to a freedman of 
his in the small hours, Abu Muwayhibah, and said: “I have been command¬ 
ed to pray forgiveness for the people of the cemetery, so come thou with 
me.” They went out together, and when they reached the BaqP the Prophet 
said: “Peace be on you, O people of the graves. Rejoice in your state, how 
much better it is than the state of men now living. Dissensions come like 
waves of darkest night, the one following hard upon the other, each worse 
than the last.” Then he turned to Abu Muwayhibah and said: “I have been 
offered the keys of the treasuries of this world and immortality therein 


1 B. XVI, 8. 


2 I.S. VIII, 76-7. 



338 Muhammad 

followed by Paradise, and I have been given the choice between that and 
meeting my Lord and Paradise.” “O dearer than my father and my 
mother,” said Abu Muwayhibah, “take the keys of the treasuries of this 
world and immortality therein followed by Paradise.” But he answered 
him saying: “I have already chosen the meeting with my Lord and 
Paradise.” Then he prayed for forgiveness for the people of the BaqiV 

It was at dawn that day, or perhaps the next day, that his head ached as 
he had never known it to ache, but he none the less went to the Mosque and 
after leading the prayer he mounted the pulpit and invoked blessings on the 
martyrs of Uhud, as if - so it was said afterwards - he were doing it for the 
last time. Then he said: “There is a slave amongst the slaves of God unto 
whom God hath offered the choice between this world and that which is 
with Him, and the slave hath chosen that which is with God.” When he 
said this Abu Bakr wept, for he knew that the Prophet was speaking of 
himself and that the choice meant imminent death. The Prophet saw that 
he had understood,, and telling him not to weep, he said: “O people, the 
most beneficent of men unto me in his companionship and in that which 
his hand bestoweth is Abu Bakr; and if I were to take from all mankind an 
inseparable friend he would be Abu Bakr — but companionship and 
brotherhood of faith is ours until God unite us in His Presence.” It was on 
that occasion that he said, looking round at the multiple entrances into the 
Mosque from the private houses which surrounded it: “Behold these doors 
that intrude upon the Mosque. Let them be walled up, save only the door 
of Abu Bakr.” 1 2 Before leaving the pulpit he said: “I go before you, and I am 
your witness. Your tryst with me is at the Pool, 3 which verily I behold from 
here where now I stand. I fear not for you that ye will set up gods beside 
God; but 1 fear for you this world, lest ye seek to rival one another in 
worldly gains.” 4 

From the Mosque he went back to the apartment of Maymunah, whose 
turn it was to house him. The effort of speech to the congregation had 
increased his fever; and after an hour or two, wishing to let ‘A’ishah know 
that he was ill, he went briefly to visit her. She also was suffering from a 
headache, and when he entered her room she moaned: “Oh my head!” 
“Nay, ‘A’ishah,” said the Prophet, “it is oh my head!” But he looked at her 
searchingly, as if to seek some sign of mortal sickness in her face, and 
finding none he said: “I wished that it might be” — he meant her death — 
“whilst yet I was alive, that I might ask forgiveness for thee and invoke 
mercy upon thee and shroud thee and pray over thee and bury thee.” 
‘A’ishah could see that he was ill and she was alarmed at the tone of his 
voice, but she tried to make light of it, and succeeded in bringing a brief 
smile to his face. Then he repeated: “Nay, but it is oh my head,” 5 and 
returned to Maymunah. 

He tried to do as he did when he was well, and continued to lead the 
prayers in the Mosque as usual; but his illness increased, until the hour 

1 1.1,1000. 2 1.1.1006. 

' Fed by Kawthar, the celestial river given to the Prophet, the Pool is a lake where the 

believers quench their thirst on their entry into Paradise. 

4 B.LXIV, 17. ' I.S.II/z, 10. 



The Choice 339 

came when he could pray only in a sitting position, and he told the 
congregation that they also should pray seated. On his return to the 
apartment of the wife whose day it was, he asked her “Where am 1 
tomorrow?” and she named the wife to whom he would go. “And where 
the day after tomorrow?” he asked. Again she answered; but struck by his 
insistence, and sensing that he was impatient to be with ‘A’ishah, she told 
the other wives, whereupon they all came to him and said: “O Messenger 
of God, we have given our days with you unto our sister ‘A’ishah.” 3 He 
accepted their gift, but was now too weak to walk unaided, so ‘Abbas and 
‘All helped him to ‘A’ishah’s apartment. 

Word came to him that there was much criticism of his choice of so 
young a man as Usamah to command the army for the Syrian campaign, 
and that there was in consequence a certain slackening in the preparations. 
He felt the need to answer his critics, but his fever was intense, so he said to 
his wives: “Pour over me seven skins of water from different wells that I 
may go out unto the men and exhort them.” Hafsah brought a tub to 
‘A’ishah’s room and the other wives brought water, and he sat in the tub 
while they poured it over him. Then they helped him to dress and bound up 
his head, and two of the men took him between them to the Mosque, where 
he sat in the pulpit and addressed those who were assembled there, saying: 
“O people, dispatch Usamah’s troop, for though ye question his leadership 
even as ye questioned the leadership of his father before him, yet is he 
worthy of the command, 2 even as his father was worthy of it.” He 
descended from the pulpit and was helped back to ‘A’ishah’s house. 
Preparations were hastened on, and Usamah went out with his army as far 
as Jurf, where they encamped, about three miles to the north of Medina. 

At the next call to prayer the Prophet felt he could no longer lead it even 
though he remained seated, so he said to his wives: “Tell Abu Bakr to lead 
the people in prayer.” But ‘A’ishah feared that it would greatly pain her 
father to take the place of the Prophet. “O Messenger of God,” she said, 
“Abu Bakr is a very sensitive man, not strong of voice and much given to 
weeping when he reciteth the Koran.” “Tell him to lead the prayer,” said 
the Prophet, as if she had not spoken. She tried again, this time suggesting 
that ‘Umar should take his place. “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer,” he 
reiterated. ‘A’ishah had thrown a glance of appeal at Hafsah, who now 
began to speak, but the Prophet silenced her with the words: “Ye are even 
as the women that were with Joseph. 3 Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in 
prayer. Let the blamer find fault and let the ambitious aspire. God and the 
believers will not have it otherwise.” 4 He repeated the last sentence three 
times, and for the rest of his illness Abu Bakr led the prayer. 

The Prophet lay much of the time with his head resting on ‘A’ishah’s 
breast or on her lap; but when Fatimah came ‘A’ishah would withdraw a 
little to allow the father and daughter some privacy together, and at one of 
these visits ‘A’ishah saw him whisper something to his daughter, who 

' I.S. H/2,30. 

2 When, after some delay, the campaign took place, Usamah proved the truth of these 
words. 

3 Referring to Potiphar’s wilful wife and her friends; see K. XII, 31-3. 

4 I.S. II/2, 20. 



340 Muhammad 


thereupon began to weep. Then he confided to her another secret and she 
smiled through her tears. As she was leaving, ‘A’ishah asked her what he 
had said, and she answered that they were secrets she could not divulge. 
But later she said to her: “The Prophet told me he would die in that illness 
whereof he died, and therefore I wept. Then he told me that I would be the 
first of the people of his house to follow him, and therefore I laughed.” 1 

He suffered much pain in his illness, and one day when it was at its worst 
his wife Safiyyah said to him: “O Prophet of God, would that I had what 
thou hast!” whereupon some of the other wives exchanged glances and 
whispered one to another that this was hypocrisy. The Prophet saw them 
and said: “Go rinse your mouths.” They asked him why, and he said: “For 
your maligning of your companion. By God, she speaketh the truth in all 
sincerity. ”- 

Umm Ayman was in constant attendance, and she kept her son in¬ 
formed. He had already resolved to advance no further and to remain in his 
camp at Jurf until God should decide. But one morning the news was such 
that he came to Medina and went in tears to the Prophet, who was too ill 
that day to speak, though he was fully conscious. Usamah bent over him 
and kissed him, and the Prophet raised his hand, palm upwards, to ask and 
to receive blessings from Heaven. Then he made a gesture as if to empty the 
contents of his hand upon Usamah, who returned sadly to his camp. 

The next day was Monday the twelfth of Rabi‘ I in the eleventh year of 
Islam, that is, the eighth day of June in the year ad 63 2. Early that morning 
the Prophet’s fever abated, and although he was exceedingly weak the call 
to prayer decided him to go to the Mosque. The prayer had already begun 
when he entered, and the people were almost drawn away from it for joy at 
the sight of him, but he motioned them to continue. For a moment he stood 
to watch them and his face shone with gladness as he marked the piety of 
their demeanour. Then, still radiant, he made his way forward, helped by 
Fadl and by Thawban, one of his freedmen. “I never saw the Prophet’s face 
more beautiful than it was at that hour,” said Anas. Abu Bakr had been 
conscious of the stir throughout the ranks behind him. He knew that it 
could only have one cause, and that the man he now heard approaching 
must be the Prophet. So without turning his head, he stepped back, but the 
Prophet placed his hand on his shoulder and pressed him forwards again in 
front of the congregation, saying “Lead thou the prayer,” while he himself 
sat on the right of Abu Bakr and prayed seated. 

Great was the rejoicing at this apparent recovery, and not long after the 
prayer Usamah arrived again from his camp, expecting to find the Prophet 
worse and overjoyed to find him better. “Set forth, with the blessings of 
God,” said the Prophet. So Usamah bade him farewell, and rode back to 
Jurf, where he told his men to make ready for the northward march. 
Meantime Abu Bakr had taken leave to go as far as Upper Medina. Already 
before his marriage to Asma’, he had long been betrothed to Hablbah, the 
daughter of Kharijah, the Khazrajite with whom he had lodged ten years 
ago on his arrival in the oasis, and they had recently been married. 
Hablbah still lived with her family at Sunh, where he now went to visit her. 

1 B.LXII, 12 . 2 I.S. VIII, 91. 



The Choice 341 


The Prophet returned to ‘A’ishah’s apartment helped by Fadl and 
Thawban. ‘All and ‘Abbas followed them there, but did not stay long, and 
when they came out some men who were passing asked ‘All how the 
Prophet was. “Praise be to God,” said ‘All, “he is well.” But when the 
questioners had gone on their way ‘Abbas took ‘All’s hand and said: “I 
swear I recognise death in the face of God’s Messenger, even as 1 have ever 
been able to recognise it in the faces of our clansmen. So let us go and speak 
with him. If his authority is to be vested in us, then we shall know it; and if 
in other than us, then will we ask him to commend us unto the people, that 
they may treat us well.” But ‘All said: “By God, I will not, for if the 
authority be withheld from us by him, none after him will ever give it us.” 1 

The Prophet had now returned to his couch and was lying with his head 
upon ‘A’ishah’s breast as if all his strength had been used. None the less, 
when her brother ‘Abd ar-Rahman entered the room with a tooth-stick in 
his hand, she saw the Prophet looking at it in such a way that she knew he 
wanted it. So she took it from her brother and gnawed upon it to soften it. 
Then she gave it to the Prophet, who rubbed his teeth with it vigorously 
despite his weakness. 

Not long afterwards he lost consciousness, and ‘A’ishah thought it was 
the onset of death, but after an hour he opened his eyes. She then 
remembered his having said to her: “No Prophet is taken by death until he 
hath been shown his place in Paradise and then offered the choice, to live or 
to die.” And she understood that this had been accomplished, and that he 
had returned from a vision of the Hereafter. “He will not now choose us!” 
she said to herself. Then she heard him murmur: “With the supreme 
communion in Paradise, with those upon whom God hath showered His 
favour, the prophets and the saints and the martyrs and the righteous, most 
excellent for communion are they . 1 Again she heard him murmur: “O 
God, with the supreme communion,” 3 and these were the last words she 
heard him speak. Gradually his head grew heavier upon her breast, until 
the other wives began to lament, and ‘A’ishah laid his head on a pillow and 
joined them in lamentation. 


1 I.I.1011. 


2 K. IV, 69. 3 I.S. 11/2,27- 



LXXXV 


The Succession and 
the Burial 

T HE signs which ‘Abbas had been the first to see had soon become 
apparent to others; and before the advent of death Umm Ayman 
had sent word to her son that the Prophet was dying. Camp had 
already been raised for the northward march but Usamah immediately 
gave orders for the return to Medina. Many of the older Companions were 
with the army, including ‘Umar, and when they were met on their arrival in 
the city with the news that the death had taken place ‘Umar refused to 
believe it. He had misinterpreted a verse of the Koran which he had 
thought to mean that the Prophet would outlive them all and other 
generations to come, and he now stood in the Mosque and addressed the 
people, assuring them that the Prophet was merely absent in the Spirit and 
that he would return. While he was speaking thus, Abu Bakr arrived on 
horseback from Sunh, for news had quickly spread over the whole oasis. 
Without pausing to speak to anyone, he went straight to his daughter’s 
house and drew back from the Prophet’s face the cloak with which they 
had covered him. He gazed at him, and then kissed him. “Dearer than my 
father and my mother,” he said, “thou hast tasted the death which God 
decreed for thee. No death after that shall ever befall thee.” Reverently he 
drew the cloak over his face again, and went out to the throng of men 
whom ‘Umar was still addressing. “Gently, ‘Umar!” he said as he 
approached. “Hear me speak!” ‘Umar paid no attention and persisted, but 
recognising the voice of Abu Bakr the people left ‘Umar and turned to hear 
what the older man had to tell them. After giving praise to God, he said: 
“O people, whoso hath been wont to worship Muhammad — verily 
Muhammad is dead; and whoso hath been wont to worship God - verily 
God is Living and dieth not.” Then he recited the following verses which 
had been revealed after the battle of Uhud: Muhammad is but a messenger, 
and messengers have passed away before him. If he die or be slain, will ye 
then turn upon your heels? Whoso turneth upon his heels will thereby do 
no hurt unto God; and God will reward the thankful .' 

It was as if the people had not known of the revelation of this verse until 
Abu Bakr recited it that day. They took it from him, and it was on all their 


HI, 144. 



The Succession and the Burial 343 

tongues. ‘Umar said afterwards: “When I heard Abu Bakr recite that verse, 
I was so astounded that I fell to the ground. My legs would no longer carry 
me, and I knew that God’s Messenger had died.” 

‘All had now withdrawn to his house, and with him were Zubayr and 
Talhah. The rest of the Emigrants gathered round Abu Bakr and they were 
joined by Usayd and many of his clan. But most of the Helpers, of Aws as 
well as Khazraj, had assembled in the hall of the Bani Sa‘idah of whom Sa‘d 
ibn ‘Ubadah was chief, and word was brought to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar that 
they were debating there the question as to where the authority should lie, 
now that the Prophet was dead. They had gladly accepted his authority; 
but failing him, many of them were inclined to think that the sons of 
Qaylah should be ruled by none except a man of Yathrib, and it appeared 
that they were about to pledge their allegiance to Sa‘d. 

‘Umar urged Abu Bakr to go with him to the hall, and Abu ‘Ubaydah 
went with them. Sa‘d was ill and he was lying in the middle of the hall, 
wrapped in a cloak. On behalf of him another of the Helpers was about to 
address the assembly when the three men of Quraysh entered, so he 
included them in his speech, which began, after praise for God, with the 
words: “We are the Helpers of God and the fighting force of Islam; and ye, 
O Emigrants, are of us, for a group of your people have settled amongst 
us.” The speaker continued in the same vein, glorifying the Helpers, and 
while giving the Emigrants a share of that glory, deliberately failing to 
recognise the unique position that they held in themselves as the first 
Islamic community. When he had finished ‘Umar was about to speak, but 
Abu Bakr silenced him and spoke himself, tactfully but firmly, reiterating 
the praise of the Helpers, but pointing out that the community of Islam was 
now spread throughout Arabia, and that the Arabs as a whole would not 
accept the authority of anyone other than a man of Quraysh, for Quraysh 
held a unique and central position amongst them. In conclusion he took 
‘Umar and Abu ‘Ubaydah each by a hand and said: “I offer you one of 
these two men. Pledge your allegiance to whichever of these ye will.” Then 
another of the Helpers rose and suggested that there should be two 
authorities, and this led to a heated argument, until finally ‘Umar inter¬ 
vened, saying: “O Helpers, know ye not that the Messenger of God 
ordered Abu Bakr to lead the prayer?” “We know it,” they answered, and 
he said: “Then which of you will willingly take precedence over him?” 
“God forbid that we should take precedence over him!” 1 they said, 
whereupon ‘Umar seized the hand of Abu Bakr and pledged allegiance to 
him, followed by Abu ‘Ubaydah and others of the Emigrants who had now 
joined them. Then all the Helpers who were present likewise pledged their 
allegiance to Abu Bakr, with the exception of Sa‘d, who never acknow¬ 
ledged him as caliph, 2 and who eventually migrated to Syria. 

Whatever they had decided in the hall, it would have been unacceptable 
for anyone to have led the prayers in the Mosque in Medina except Abu 
Bakr, so long as he was there; and the next day at dawn, before leading the 
prayer, he sat in the pulpit, and ‘Umar rose and addressed the assembly, 

1 I.S. U/2,23. 

2 In Arabic Kballfab, the full title being Khalifat Rasul Allah, Viceregent for the 
Messenger of God. 



344 Muhammad 

bidding them pledge their allegiance to Abu Bakr, whom he described as 
“the best of you, the Companion of God’s Messenger, the second of two 
when they were both in the cave ” 1 A recent Revelation had recalled the 
privilege of Abu Bakr to have been the Prophet’s sole Companion at this 
crucial moment ; 2 and with one voice the whole congregation swore fealty 
to him - all except ‘All, who did so later . 3 

Then Abu Bakr gave praise and thanks to God and addressed them, 
saying: “I have been given the authority over you, and I am not the best of 
you. If I do well, help me; and if I do wrong, set me right. Sincere regard for 
truth is loyalty and disregard for truth is treachery. The weak amongst you 
shall be strong with me until I have secured his rights, if God will; and the 
strong amongst you shall be weak with me until I have wrested from him 
the rights of others, if God will. Obey me so long as I obey God and His 
Messenger. But if I disobey God and his Messenger, ye owe me no 
obedience. Arise for your prayer, God have mercy upon you !” 4 

After the prayer the Prophet’s household and his family decided that 
they must prepare him for burial, but they were in disagreement as to how 
it should be done. Then God cast a sleep upon them all, and in his sleep 
each man heard a voice say: “Wash the Prophet with his garment upon 
him.” So they went to ‘A’ishah’s apartment, which for the moment she had 
vacated, and Aws ibn KhawlI, a Khazrajite, begged leave to represent the 
Helpers, saying: “I adjure thee by God, O ‘All, and by our share in His 
Messenger!,” and ‘All allowed him to enter. ‘Abbas and his sons Fadl and 
Qitham helped ‘All to turn the body, while Usamah poured water over it, 
helped by Shuqran, one of the Prophet’s freedmen, and ‘All passed his 
hand over every part of the long woollen garment. “Dearer than my father 
and my mother,” he said, “how excellent art thou, in life and in death!” 
Even after one day, the Prophet’s body seemed to be sunken merely in 
sleep, except that there was no breathing and no pulse, no warmth and no 
suppleness. 

The Companions now disagreed as to where he should be buried. It 
seemed to many that his grave should be near the graves of his three 
daughters and Ibrahim and the Companions whom he himself had buried 
and prayed over, in the BaqI al-Gharqad, while others thought he should 
be buried in the Mosque; but Abu Bakr remembered having heard him say 
“No Prophet dieth but is buried where he died,” so the grave was dug in the 
floor of ‘A’ishah’s room near the couch where he was lying. 

1 K. IX, 40. 

2 See p. 119. 

3 After the death of Fatimah some months later, ‘All said to Abu Bakr: “We know well 
thy pre-eminence and what God hath bestowed upon thee, and we are not jealous of any 
benefit that He hath caused to come unto thee. But thou didst confront us with a thing 
accomplished, leaving us no choice, and we felt that we had seme claim therein for our 
nearness of kinship unto the Messenger of God.” Then Abu Bakr’s eyes filled with tears and 
he said: “By Him in whose hand is my soul, I had rather that all should be well between me 
and the kindred of God’s Messenger than between me and mine own kindred”; and at noon 
that day in the Mosque he publicly exonerated ‘All for not yet having recognised him as 
caliph, whereupon ‘All affirmed the right of Abu Bakr and pledged his allegiance to him (B. 
LX 1 V, 38). 

4 I.I. 1017. 



The Succession and the Burial 


345 


Then all the people of Medina visited him and prayed over him. They 
came in relays, and each small gathering prayed the funeral prayer - firstly 
the men, group after group, and then when all the men had visited him the 
women came, and after them the children. That night he was laid in his 
grave by ‘All and the others who had prepared him for burial. 

Great was the sorrow in the City of Light, as Medina now is called. The 
Companions rebuked each other for weeping, but wept themselves. “Not 
for him do I weep,” said Umm Ayman, when questioned about her tears. 
“Know I not that he hath gone to that which is better for him than this 
world? But I weep for the tidings of Heaven which have been cut off from 
us .” 1 It was indeed as if a great door had been closed. Yet they remembered 
that he had said: “What have I to do with this world? I and this world are 
as a rider and a tree beneath which he taketh shelter. Then he goeth on his 
way, and leaveth it behind him .” 2 He had said this that they, each one of 
them, might say it of themselves; and if the door had now closed, it would 
be open for the faithful at death. They still had in their ears the sound of his 
saying: “I go before you, and I am your witness. Your tryst with me is at the 
Pool.” Having delivered his message in this world, he had gone to fulfil it in 
the Hereafter, where he would continue to be, for them and for others, but 
without the limitations of life on earth, the Key of Mercy , 3 the Key of 
Paradise, the Spirit of Truth, the Happiness of God. 

Verily God and His angels whelm in blessings the prophet . O ye who 

believe, invoke blessings upon him, and give him greetings of Peace. 